[Amit Varma]: The philosopher Thomas Nagel once wrote an essay called What is it like to be a bat?
[Amit Varma]: The essay deals with the nature of consciousness, its deep and nuanced and influential and controversial.
[Amit Varma]: And my takeaway from it, when I first read it as a kid, was that no matter how much knowledge
[Amit Varma]: we gather, we cannot really know what it is like to be a bat.
[Amit Varma]: Bats navigate the world through something called echolocation. In other words, they
[Amit Varma]: use sound to see. Now, we can understand this at an intellectual level, using the laws of
[Amit Varma]: physics and so on, but we can't actually get inside the head of a bat. And why only look
[Amit Varma]: at other species? I would argue that despite being wired for empathy, it is hard for any
[Amit Varma]: one human to know what it is to be someone else. For example, I'm a man. And no matter
[Amit Varma]: how much knowledge or empathy I have, I can't truly know what it is like to be a woman.
[Amit Varma]: To carry that extra layer of awareness every time I enter a lift, or walk on the street
[Amit Varma]: at night, or just sense someone's inclusive gaze on me. Those extra layers would shape
[Amit Varma]: everything else about me till I wouldn't be me. And that's the whole point.
[Amit Varma]: And this is not just across gender. One of my favourite novelists, Georges Simenon, once
[Amit Varma]: said that the biggest tragedy in the world was that communication, complete communication
[Amit Varma]: is impossible between any two people in this world. Maybe we can never truly know other
[Amit Varma]: people who remain characters in the grand play in our head. Maybe we can never even
[Amit Varma]: know ourselves, because we are wired to be self delusional. But before I go too far down
[Amit Varma]: that road, let me come to the question that sparked my desire to record this episode.
[Amit Varma]: For someone born a Hindu in India, is it possible to truly know what it is like to be born a
[Amit Varma]: Muslim?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. My guest today is Ghazala Wahab, author of the book
[Amit Varma]: Born a Muslim, Some Truths about Islam in India. I love this book, learned a lot from
[Amit Varma]: it, and I recommend all of you read it as well. This book contains multitudes. It is
[Amit Varma]: both personal memoir, as well as a scholarly history of Islam in India through the centuries.
[Amit Varma]: It covers the different routes Islam took through India, from trade and travel to conquest.
[Amit Varma]: It covers the different influences within Islam, from the Arabic to the Persian. It
[Amit Varma]: looks at the harmonising influence of the Sufis, as well as the polarising effect of
[Amit Varma]: the radical sects that later emerged, inspired by Wahhabism. It shows us how a series of
[Amit Varma]: events drove Muslims in India away from the mainstream, and how their politics was often
[Amit Varma]: so disconnected from their social reality. Most of all, it shows us the insecurity that
[Amit Varma]: Muslims feel in India today, and the vicious circle of mistrust and animosity that we seem
[Amit Varma]: to be trapped within.
[Amit Varma]: But there is also much in this book to take hope from. This conversation covers a lot
[Amit Varma]: of ground, and the first 90 minutes or so, until the break, are about Gazala's personal
[Amit Varma]: journey, in a sense mimicking the structure of the book. I always begin my episodes by
[Amit Varma]: chatting about my guest's life so far, and I find it as fascinating as whatever subject
[Amit Varma]: we may be discussing. I may never know what it is like to be a bat, but it's a lovely
[Amit Varma]: feeling to get a sense of how someone else has been shaped. If I could say to everyone
[Amit Varma]: I met, let me walk for a moment in your shoes, and if they let me do that, I would be so
[Amit Varma]: lucky. So I always love this first portion, but if you want to get to the part of the
[Amit Varma]: show where we talk about the history of Islam, well then that begins after the first break
[Amit Varma]: at around the 90 minute mark. But hey, just listen to the full thing. Before that though,
[Amit Varma]: let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: One of the great tragedies of my life is that I had such bad math teachers in school. For
[Amit Varma]: that reason, I never got turned on to math till I was an adult and fell in love with
[Amit Varma]: it while writing about economics and playing poker for a living. But oh my god, math is
[Amit Varma]: so much fun. That's why I have an online course to recommend to you. Head on over to
[Amit Varma]: the sponsors of this episode, The Great Courses Plus at thegreatcoursesplus.com and check
[Amit Varma]: out a course called The Joy of Mathematics by Arthur T. Benjamin. Over 24 lectures, this
[Amit Varma]: course will show you how to have fun with maths. In fact, I shouldn't call them lectures,
[Amit Varma]: but play sessions. The chapter titles include The Joy of Primes, The Joy of Algebra, The
[Amit Varma]: Joy of the Imaginary Number, The Joy of Infinity, Joy, Joy, Joy, you get the picture. And that's
[Amit Varma]: just one of the many great courses on this aptly named site. The Great Courses Plus has
[Amit Varma]: a fantastic library of online courses from subjects ranging from music, math, cooking,
[Amit Varma]: history, political theory, and much else. They also have an app where you can listen
[Amit Varma]: to the audio of these courses the same way you're listening to this podcast now. And
[Amit Varma]: it will cost you nothing. You get one month of unlimited free access if you use the following
[Amit Varma]: URL, thegreatcoursesplus.com slash unseen. That's right, unseen, thegreatcoursesplus.com
[Amit Varma]: slash unseen for one month of unlimited free access. Count your blessings.
[Amit Varma]: Gazala, hi, welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. Thank you so much. Such a pleasure being here.
[Amit Varma]: I loved reading your book, Born a Muslim. And, you know, one of the sort of things I
[Amit Varma]: really liked about it is how it's such an organic mix of the personal and the socio
[Amit Varma]: political that, you know, through the story of your own life, in a sense, and your experiences,
[Amit Varma]: you're also tracing the history of Islam in India, how it's kind of evolved through the
[Amit Varma]: decades and, you know, what it's like to be Muslim in India today, all of which taught
[Amit Varma]: me a lot. But we'll, let's begin this as you begin your book, you begin your book with
[Amit Varma]: this wonderful introduction, which to me was worth the price of the book alone, which is
[Amit Varma]: like this long personal essay, which talks about your growing up years and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, even before that, tell me a little bit about the young Gazala as a kid,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where did you grow up? What kind of person were you? And what were your early
[Amit Varma]: influences? What would you read? Fill me into some of that.
[Guest]: I grew up in a small Muslim dominated mahala of Agra. We were a large family living in
[Guest]: a very small house. So there were always too many people and too few rooms. And we had
[Guest]: to share rooms. So it was understood that girls would be sharing the rooms with their
[Guest]: aunts and boys would be sharing with their uncles. And there was never enough space for
[Guest]: the kids to play. Since, and it was a joint family, my grandfather had 11 kids, six sons
[Guest]: and actually seven sons and four daughters, one of his sons died early. So and I grew
[Guest]: up with a lot of cousins at home. And we were not allowed to step out of the house because
[Guest]: both my grandfather and my father and his younger siblings felt that they wanted to
[Guest]: give us a different kind of life as opposed to our neighborhood. Our neighborhood was
[Guest]: largely low middle class. And most of the people were employed in some sort of a family
[Guest]: low level business. So a lot of people were underemployed because all of them were doing
[Guest]: the same thing. So the kids also didn't go to the best of schools, a lot of kids didn't
[Guest]: go to school. So my family, an extended family, they wanted something different for their
[Guest]: children. We all went to English medium school, I went to a convent school. So to prevent
[Guest]: us from stepping out of the house unescorted or to mingle with the other kids, we used
[Guest]: to be told very fanciful stories about if we go out, somebody would be sitting there
[Guest]: and he'll be kidnapped or somebody would do some sort of a black magic and we turn into
[Guest]: something else. So that lane outside the house was always full of dangerous possibilities.
[Guest]: And I was not a very brave child. So I was happy staying inside. So we, for us, our play
[Guest]: area used to be the rooftop where we would spend most of our time. But because I was
[Guest]: not a very athletic child, I had, I was prone to falling very often and hurting myself,
[Guest]: especially my ankles. So I was not heavily into a lot of physical games that my other
[Guest]: cousins would play. And I got more interested because we didn't have any technology, no
[Guest]: television at home. So we, I drifted into reading and I had this huge desire to just
[Guest]: read because it was so entertaining that I used to read anything I could lay my hands
[Guest]: on. I would read the newspaper, whatever I could make of it. I would read textbooks of
[Guest]: my younger aunts and my uncles. I would read that salacious magazines that my uncle was
[Guest]: subscribing to a Hindi magazine called Manohar Kahania. So whatever I could figure out or
[Guest]: make of it, I used to hide in some corner of the house. Most of the time it used to
[Guest]: be below the staircase because nobody would be able to see me there. So I would just sit
[Guest]: there, read, or maybe go to the rooftop with everybody else. And while the other kids would
[Guest]: be playing, I would sit with one of the books in the corner. Came to such a pass that my
[Guest]: mother was very worried about me, about what kind of stuff I was reading. So if I was found
[Guest]: with something in my hand, she would immediately confiscate and check what I was doing because
[Guest]: I would just pick up anything randomly and start reading. And along with that, I also
[Guest]: developed sort of a desire that I also want to write what I was reading. I should be able
[Guest]: to produce something like this. So writing happened concurrently. It was earlier I couldn't
[Guest]: write prose or something, so I would dabble into some stupid poetry. And so all this was
[Guest]: going on. Finally, I started writing or thinking about writing a little more seriously when
[Guest]: my father once asked me to write something. He used to come to Delhi very frequently because
[Guest]: my father was an exporter and a lot of business associates. And he used to export to the state
[Guest]: trading corporation. So their office was in Delhi. So he had to come to Delhi quite often
[Guest]: to meet the bureaucrats, the government officials there. So often we used to come with him because
[Guest]: it was not a long journey. It would just take about four to five hours in an ambassador
[Guest]: car. So we used to come here and that's when sometimes he would go to Palika Bazaar and
[Guest]: pick up something. And from Hindi, I switched a little to English, you know, kids' magazines
[Guest]: like Tinkle or very basic stuff like that. So on our journey back to Agra, after one
[Guest]: such trip, there was a huge procession and we had to take a detour from the main road
[Guest]: and we went through the old city to come to our house in the mahala. And I saw a huge
[Guest]: procession there moving with a statue and I asked my father what it was. So he explained
[Guest]: to me that was Dr. Ambedkar's statue and the procession was being led by his followers
[Guest]: and they're taking it for, putting it there outside the Agra fort. They were setting it
[Guest]: up there. They had built a small park there where the statue was to be set up. And then
[Guest]: obviously I was curious who Dr. Ambedkar was. So he told me the entire story of his life,
[Guest]: how he was a low caste, he had to sit outside the classroom and how despite all that because
[Guest]: he was so diligent, he worked so hard, he became such a huge personality that he actually
[Guest]: wrote the constitution. I mean, he told me he wrote the constitution. It's much later
[Guest]: that you realize what he did. So once we reached home, he asked me to write it down for him
[Guest]: to see if I have understood correctly. And over the next two, three days, I wrote whatever
[Guest]: I remembered in a very haphazard sort of English, because English was not my, neither of us
[Guest]: first language. And we also didn't speak English at home. So whatever language I knew, I knew
[Guest]: it from the school. So I wrote it down a few 10, 15 sentences and showed it to my father.
[Guest]: He was very happy. That encouraged me a lot. I thought I have some potential as a writer.
[Guest]: Few days later, there was this incident of two gangsters, Ranga and Billa, kidnapping
[Guest]: these siblings, Sanjay and Geeta. And this was all over the newspapers. We used to get
[Guest]: Amar Jala at home and I read the headlines. I read a little bit of the news. And I asked
[Guest]: my father what this incident was about. So he explained it to me. And again, he asked
[Guest]: me, why don't you write it down? So then I wrote it down. And I tried to copy the newspaper
[Guest]: style of writing it, like intro, just summarizing what happened and then giving a little detail.
[Guest]: So that's how I was writing concurrently as I was reading. But my reading was not really
[Guest]: literature. It was reading of the papers which were coming home, reading of some stray magazines
[Guest]: and just whatever I could lay my hands on. That was also the time our family was, you
[Guest]: know, we were moving up the ladder of economic prosperity. So things were gradually changing
[Guest]: at home. So my access to a lot of things were also improving gradually. Subsequently, we
[Guest]: moved from this house to another house that my father was building. We were a nuclear
[Guest]: family now, except that my younger uncle had come to stay with us. And here all of us had
[Guest]: our own rooms. There were attached bathrooms, which was a huge luxury. I had never imagined
[Guest]: something like this. We'd only seen it in hotels. And my father had gone and set up
[Guest]: a place with bathtubs in each bathroom. So it was again a huge luxury. And very ambitiously,
[Guest]: he had built a study in this house. I'll just take you back a little bit. And my father
[Guest]: himself was not a school educated person. His learning of the languages was also self
[Guest]: tutored. And my mother also just did class 11, and then she got married. So basically,
[Guest]: my family was not a very educated family. We came from a working class background, despite
[Guest]: the fact that in the caste, Muslim caste hierarchy or class hierarchy, we were number two from
[Guest]: the top. But in terms of education, because my grandfather, his family, they were quite
[Guest]: poor. And most of them were artisans. So it was more important for them to know a trade.
[Guest]: So my grandfather knew the trade of footwear, the upper of the shoe. They used to do that
[Guest]: stitching of the uppers. So that is what he had learned. And my father also started like
[Guest]: that. He started working in a factory as a person who would cut the upper and then subsequently
[Guest]: he became a supervisor. And eventually he started his own factory. But his desire to
[Guest]: learn and he was very fascinated by English language. So he had approached a munshi in
[Guest]: the factory who used to do the accounting of, you know, he used to distribute the weekly
[Guest]: wages. So he advised my father that one of the easy ways of learning the language is
[Guest]: that my father could read Urdu. So he said, you subscribe to a Urdu newspaper and you
[Guest]: subscribe to an English newspaper. And if they are from the same organizations, the
[Guest]: news would be identical. So you could read it in Urdu and then you could try and read
[Guest]: in English. So he helped my father with alphabets. And my father then started reading Komi Awas
[Guest]: and National Herald. Both of them came from the National Herald group of papers. So he
[Guest]: has own learning was, it was self-tutored. So when we moved to the new house and my father
[Guest]: built his study, he had no exposure to literature really. And he had no references as to what
[Guest]: he should buy and what he should put in his study. So he used to come to Delhi and he
[Guest]: used to make a special trip during the Delhi Book Fair and just pick up books which looked
[Guest]: good or books which had some nice blurb or if somebody recommended to him. So it was
[Guest]: a very eclectic kind of collection and very little fiction there because he obviously
[Guest]: thought if he's spending so much money on books, the books should give him something
[Guest]: in return. I mean, he should be able to learn something. So there was a lot of history,
[Guest]: a lot of modern Indian history. Authors like Dominic LePere, Larry Collins, because he
[Guest]: thought their language was very beautiful, very evocative. Then he used to buy books
[Guest]: in bulk. So we had the full collection of Patel's biography by, I'm forgetting the name
[Guest]: of the author now. Then the entire collection of Nehru, collection of Gandhi. So that is
[Guest]: how, what the study was. So when I started reading books, it was, my introduction was
[Guest]: through nonfiction. So I was reading a lot of historical books. I was reading a lot of
[Guest]: biographies. I drifted to fiction much, much later in life and I was already 13 or 14 years
[Guest]: old when I started reading novels. And by this time, girls my age had already gone past
[Guest]: Enid Blyton's and Nancy Drew. So I never really grew up reading them. I probably read one
[Guest]: odd book of this and that, but I then moved to other authors. And so, and alongside this,
[Guest]: I started fancying myself as a poet because I thought that I was introduced to Urdu poetry
[Guest]: through my parents. They were heavily into poetry. So I couldn't read Urdu, but I used
[Guest]: to ask my mother if she could read out verses to me in Urdu. Or I would nag my father to
[Guest]: read out passages from Maulana Azad's Khubare Khater, where he's talking about his experience
[Guest]: in the jail. So all this drew me to Urdu and I somehow was very attracted to the style
[Guest]: of Ghazals. And even though I didn't understand a lot of it, I just loved the sound of it.
[Guest]: And I used to memorize verses and recite them to myself. So my parents thought that maybe
[Guest]: I can be a poet. So Urdu teacher was appointed and he was also a poet. So he started teaching
[Guest]: me Urdu poetry. And I started writing a few verses in Urdu, which I thought was very bad.
[Guest]: And finally, I realized that I am terrible as a poet. And I was embarrassed of my own
[Guest]: verses, which I wrote. And around that time, I think I came back to English writing. And
[Guest]: I started writing some sort of a long form of writing, just putting together in a nonsense
[Guest]: ideas which would come to me or sitting in my study, looking out of the window. So I
[Guest]: would just write a descriptive essay sort of a thing, a short piece, just describing
[Guest]: that moment. Maybe what helped in this was I was a huge daydreamer. I had never been
[Guest]: bored of my own company. I never ever said this to anybody that I'm getting bored. If
[Guest]: I had nothing to do, I would just sit idle and daydream and just imagine things happening
[Guest]: to me, imagine things happening around me. And I could spend hours doing just that and
[Guest]: not be bothered at all. So when I started writing, a lot of my writing, my trial and
[Guest]: error sort of writing used to be just describing a particular scene that I was either imagining
[Guest]: or witnessing. So that is how I was when I was growing up. And I didn't have too many
[Guest]: friends. I didn't make too many friends. So I don't want to say that I was a lonely or
[Guest]: I preferred being on my own. But I did like to be on my own a lot of times. And even if
[Guest]: I was with friends, as I was growing older, I often wanted to just come back and sit in
[Guest]: my room and just be on my own. And probably that was one of the reasons because I had
[Guest]: my own attached bathroom. I used to spend a lot of time in my bathroom because nobody
[Guest]: would disturb me there. So I would just lock myself in there and sit there for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: So that is what it was growing up. Yeah, there is so much to unpack there. And
[Amit Varma]: just from sort of what you said right now, there's so much that I want to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of you know, before we get to the personal narrative of how events unfolded
[Amit Varma]: around you and your family and all of that, I'd like to stay with reading a bit like first
[Amit Varma]: of all, all this makes me very sort of nostalgic, because you know, younger people today don't
[Amit Varma]: realize what a joy it was to read anything that you could get your hand on back in those
[Amit Varma]: days when you didn't have the internet and the world of information at your fingertips.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I think, you know, a defining image for all Indian kids growing up in the 80s
[Amit Varma]: would be the one that you described of yourself sitting under the stairs reading Manohar Khania,
[Amit Varma]: which is, to me, you know, the story of so many people just sort of in one image, what
[Amit Varma]: also kind of strikes me is the multilingual nature of how you were coming up like one
[Amit Varma]: thing that I've realized is that, you know, being from a fairly like I was from a fairly
[Amit Varma]: privileged background. And though in one sense, it was a restriction in the sense that everything
[Amit Varma]: I read was essentially in English, I read a little bit of Hindi here and there I did
[Amit Varma]: well in school and all that in Hindi, but all my reading was English. Many of the people
[Amit Varma]: I later encountered in working life, were also people who grew up reading English newspapers,
[Amit Varma]: English books got everything from English. And in a certain sense, that limited their
[Amit Varma]: worldview. This is a theme I've explored with earlier guests in episodes, I think it came
[Amit Varma]: up when I was chatting with Akshay Mukul, Rahul Verma, both of whom also read in Hindi
[Amit Varma]: while growing up. And number one, did you feel that being multilingual like this reading
[Amit Varma]: these multiple languages, Hindi, Urdu, English, that it kind of that your vision was broader
[Amit Varma]: than say, maybe the people you would subsequently work with in journalism or whatever that you
[Amit Varma]: had seen things that they would not have known or expected, because many of us English speaking
[Amit Varma]: elites are kind of, you know, in our little bubbles, and we don't really see the world
[Amit Varma]: outside. But you had, of course, through growing up, you had gotten a glimpse of that, but
[Amit Varma]: also through languages. And I'll wait for you to answer this, because there's a related
[Amit Varma]: question, which also fascinates me, which has to do with language. But, you know, what's
[Guest]: your take on this? You know, this exposure to different languages, it was not just a
[Guest]: question of language, it was a question of different world altogether. Hindi, as I was
[Guest]: used to go through the textbooks of my aunt, I became familiar with writings of Premchand
[Guest]: at a very young age, probably even at a time when I was not intelligent enough to grasp
[Guest]: the depth of what he was writing, but I could read and I could see a completely different
[Guest]: world. Or writers like, you know, Hindi versions of Manto. Now, it was hugely shocking, his
[Guest]: work for a child to be reading that it was really a completely different sort of a idiom,
[Guest]: a completely different sort of imagery that would conjure up in your head. So I felt that
[Guest]: I was exposed to a variety of things, which when I came to Delhi, and I was exposed to
[Guest]: entirely the English speaking group of friends in my college, and subsequently when I started
[Guest]: working, they were not exposed to this. So when I would talk to them, they would be talking
[Guest]: about Chekhov, and I would, I had read Chekhov in life, but my understanding, I mean, I could
[Guest]: relate to that poverty part of it, because I had some, that I had seen any poverty, I
[Guest]: didn't. I was privileged in the sense that by the time I was growing up, my family had
[Guest]: resources. But having read this, I could understand, I could make the connection. Probably another
[Guest]: thing I would want to add here is it's not just the languages in the novels or in the
[Guest]: books, it's also the languages of the newspapers. And I would come back to the newspaper for
[Guest]: the simple reason, as a journalist, my exposure to newspaper writing in India has been greater.
[Guest]: And I have seen how newspapers have evolved in India since the mid 80s onwards. Mid 80s
[Guest]: was the time when I was in my teens, and I was reading the newspapers on a very regular
[Guest]: basis. I'll give you a small example. In the 80s, probably there was a government directive
[Guest]: that if there was a communal riot or a violence somewhere, the communities would not be identified.
[Guest]: So it was all, the newspaper reports would say one community has rioted and the second
[Guest]: community reacted. Then the police opened fire and four members of one community have.
[Guest]: So they would be like that, very vague. I always was curious, who are these communities?
[Guest]: Who was the instigator? Who started the riot? Who were the people killed? But the English
[Guest]: newspapers would not put this out, maybe out of the government order or out of deference
[Guest]: for sentiments or whatever. But the Hindi newspaper were very clever. They, papers like
[Guest]: Amarajala, Adenik, they would say Bahusankhyak, which is majority, and they would say Alpsankhyak.
[Guest]: So you would know which community has done what. So they were cutting across the government
[Guest]: directive in a very clever way. The Urdu newspapers would identify. They would identify the victims
[Guest]: by, not by the community, but by names. So you knew that in the police firing, Javed
[Guest]: and Saje that so and so have died. So they were actually short circuiting the government.
[Guest]: So I realised that the English journalism, for the sake of being fair and not instigating
[Guest]: more violence or whatever the principles, was only conveying half a story. So as a reference
[Guest]: to a particular event, you would not get the correct picture. Whereas the vernacular would
[Guest]: give you in some way, it would, it would manage to convey the actual story. The other thing
[Guest]: was that in English journalism, it was said that, you know, the reporter should be invisible.
[Guest]: You know, you should not show yourself because that invisibility ensures or it was meant
[Guest]: to ensure some kind of impartiality. But in the vernacular writing, the reporter would
[Guest]: be invisible, but reporter's bias would be very, very obvious. So it was, when I was
[Guest]: growing up, even then in Agra, I was conscious of the fact that this particular reporter,
[Guest]: if he's saying this, there is a lot of exaggeration in a certain report. So you don't have to
[Guest]: show yourself up, but your bias shows. So when I come to Delhi and I was studying in
[Guest]: college and I used to interact with my classmates, I realized that our sensibilities and sensitivity
[Guest]: towards our environment were very, very different. For example, another example, this Mandal
[Guest]: agitation was at its peak when I joined college. And I found that most of my classmates were
[Guest]: actually just repeating what probably they had heard at home and their anger, their rage
[Guest]: against the recommendations was not really reflective of what the truth or the history
[Guest]: of India has been. So I was amazed that this sort of a privileged overhang over these people,
[Guest]: how much it enables prejudice, how much it is a factor in encouraging a biased view of
[Guest]: your own society. So there's another thing, because of this exposure to multilingual writing,
[Guest]: both in books and newspapers, I also felt that now when everybody talks about Ganga
[Guest]: Jamuni and people talk about Ganga Jamuni culture of North India, especially the UP,
[Guest]: Bihar and parts of Northern Madhya Pradesh, people who have not seen this through literature,
[Guest]: through writings of a certain period, they assume what the culture would be. See, if
[Guest]: you read short stories by Premchand, you would realize that it was not just celebrating each
[Guest]: other's festivals. It was not just going to somebody's house on Eid or Diwali. There was
[Guest]: so much of economic interdependence. The characters were organic, but irrespective of religion,
[Guest]: characters used to be organic with the stories because that is how a small town or rural
[Guest]: India lived. There was so much of social and economic engagement with each other. So now
[Guest]: a lot of people when they talk about, oh, but we always greeted our Muslim friends on
[Guest]: Eid or our Hindu friends, we played Holi with them. That's just one and probably a superficial
[Guest]: part of it. It doesn't really convey the kind of dependence you had on each other, the kind
[Guest]: of trust you had on each other. I'm sorry if I'm giving too many examples. Can I give
[Guest]: one more example?
[Amit Varma]: Please, please go ahead. There's no such thing as too many examples.
[Guest]: You know, I had met one gentleman in Delhi while I was working on my book, but I had,
[Guest]: he was from Farooqabad. So he was narrating the incident of when he was growing up there.
[Guest]: His family lived in a village where the majority in the village were not Muslims. And his family
[Guest]: was among the two or three Muslim families in that village. But whenever anybody went
[Guest]: out of the village to visit somewhere or go on a holiday, irrespective of religion, such
[Guest]: was the stature of this person's father, that he used to, everybody, whoever was going would
[Guest]: leave the house keys, leave the cattle, everything with this family, that you please take care
[Guest]: of our cattle, you take care of our house while you're away. So that was the level of
[Guest]: trust and that was the lived heritage of those people, that community, irrespective of religion.
[Guest]: So this is something which you will, you know, if you are either from this area, or you have
[Guest]: the sensibility to see it, even if it's not very obvious.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. Again, there's a lot to unpack here. You know, all of these answers of yours
[Amit Varma]: are like little Chinese boxes, you open one layer, and there's another layer below that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so before we get to kind of the subject at hand, and what you've written about
[Amit Varma]: in your book, you know, I'll just take one more digression with due apology to my listeners,
[Amit Varma]: because it's a subject that fascinates me. And it again has to do with language. So now
[Amit Varma]: I teach this online writing course. And a few months back, you know, one of the girls
[Amit Varma]: who was doing that, who had this very sharp way of observing things, but the language
[Amit Varma]: was a little not quite formed yet. And she kind of came to me with a problem. And she
[Amit Varma]: said, you know, the thing is, English is not my first language. So I'm having trouble kind
[Amit Varma]: of expressing it. And what can I do? And at that point, I remembered, author I had discovered
[Amit Varma]: called Agatha Christophe, like I'd watched an interview of Jhumpa Lahiri by Tyler Cowen.
[Amit Varma]: And I link all of these from the show notes. And what Lahiri had done was, her languages
[Amit Varma]: are English and Bengali, but she learned Italian from scratch. And then she wrote a book in
[Amit Varma]: Italian. So as an adult, you're learning a whole new language, and you're writing a book
[Amit Varma]: in that. So when Tyler asked her about that, she pointed to the example of Agatha Christophe,
[Amit Varma]: who essentially I think, during the war, shifted as an adult to France from somewhere maybe
[Amit Varma]: Hungary or wherever, I don't remember, but shifted to France, learned French at the age
[Amit Varma]: of 2021. And then wrote a series of incredible books in French, a completely new language
[Amit Varma]: to her. So I recommended to this, the participant in my course that why don't you try reading
[Amit Varma]: Agatha Christophe, because her language is very sparse, very powerful, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And she recently told me a few months after I gave her the record, that one, she loved
[Amit Varma]: those books. And two, what she started doing was that she started, you know, copying from
[Amit Varma]: the book in the sense writing each sentence again by hand, to get a closer sense of what
[Amit Varma]: the language was like. And that struck me as something beautiful and inspiring. Because
[Amit Varma]: what it means is that you're looking at the language with, you know, so to say, gehraayi
[Amit Varma]: and nazdiki, which you otherwise don't, because we people, like I take English for granted,
[Amit Varma]: I have to remind myself to be mindful and, you know, go word by word, notice all the
[Amit Varma]: little intricacies of it. But because she was kind of new to it, she was doing this
[Amit Varma]: and it struck me as such a beautiful thing to do. And therefore, I want to ask that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you mentioned that you, at one point, you were drawn to poetry. And it again, struck
[Amit Varma]: me that, you know, anyone who is, for example, exposed to Urdu, would turn to poetry because
[Amit Varma]: Urdu is such a beautiful lyrical language, you know, English almost seems like a functional
[Amit Varma]: kind of dry language compared to that. So your experience in these different languages,
[Amit Varma]: do you think, in some ways, it shaped the book you write? Like, you know, everything
[Amit Varma]: that you've written is obviously very accomplished. No one can tell that English is sort of not
[Amit Varma]: your mother tongue in that sense. So, you know, did you ever during the course of your
[Amit Varma]: time, pay that kind of attention to language growing up? Maybe, you know, like everybody,
[Amit Varma]: of course, as I get into journalism and writing will pay attention to craft, they learn to
[Amit Varma]: edit, they learn to do all of that. But did you feel that there was some, you know, element
[Amit Varma]: of looking deeper at the language while you were writing in it?
[Guest]: Actually, no, I think language, or writing in English came very naturally to me, I have
[Guest]: no idea how. Even when I was writing grammatically incorrect English, my tenses would be a bit
[Guest]: heavier. I was always able to put the imagery that I was thinking what I was looking at
[Guest]: on paper. When I was in first year college, some like, I think the general elections announced
[Guest]: and I had gone to Agra. And I saw this, I'm forgetting the name of the candidate, Nihal
[Guest]: Singh or somebody. I saw an entourage of this guy. During the campaign, I was driving on
[Guest]: the highway and just short of Agra, there was a dhaba and I, these guys were there.
[Guest]: So I saw that entourage and I, I just liked that image, the visual image it conjured up
[Guest]: of people in white kurtas and topis and all those chirpais just outside the dhaba and,
[Guest]: you know, some guys coming, people coming, touching the feet of this candidate. And so
[Guest]: I, we had stopped at the dhaba for tea and I was watching these things happening there.
[Guest]: And it was so fascinating for me that I wrote that scene. And when I came back to college,
[Guest]: I was, we were sitting with some friends and I showed it to one of them. And then somehow
[Guest]: it went to my class teacher's hands. I don't know how that went there. And he was so fascinated.
[Guest]: He asked me to come and read it out. So I was made to read it out to the class. And
[Guest]: I was embarrassed because while I was reading, I realized that there were a lot of mistakes
[Guest]: in it. The articles were missing in some places because I had just written it because it was
[Guest]: fascinating. So he told me that, you know, you have a very descriptive way of writing
[Guest]: in this thing. Maybe you should pursue this a little more seriously. And I realized that
[Guest]: even though I was probably not as proficient with the grammar of the language, I was able
[Guest]: to express myself and maybe use it in a way to describe things and maybe describe them
[Guest]: in a manner which gives you a sense of what I had seen. So probably the Urdu poetry played
[Guest]: a role in this because there is a form in Urdu poetry, which is a descriptive form,
[Guest]: you know, beyond Urdu poetry has a lot of forms. I mean, the most popular are ghazals
[Guest]: and rubais to some extent. But then there are other forms also. There are forms where
[Guest]: you are describing scenes. There are forms where you're exaggerating situations. So it
[Guest]: has a variety of forms. So when I was learning the poetry from my teacher, he acquainted
[Guest]: me with these forms. And I was fascinated that actually poetry is not enough. Within
[Guest]: the poetry also, you have distinguished one form from another. And probably that had some
[Guest]: sort of impact on me, just describing a situation as it was. Why I'm going on about describing
[Guest]: a part is that maybe when I became a journalist, when I joined my first job, it was, I mean,
[Guest]: my seniors decided that I should get into feature writing because I was more suited
[Guest]: for feature writing as opposed to daily news reporting, because news reporting doesn't
[Guest]: give you the option of or the luxury of just going off tangent and spending so much of
[Guest]: space on building up the situation or building up the story. So I don't think I had a struggle
[Guest]: as far as writing was concerned. The struggle part was always trying to cut short my flight
[Guest]: of fancy and come to the point.
[Amit Varma]: That's really fascinating. And, you know, someday we should do an episode on the different
[Amit Varma]: forms of writing in Urdu and all of that. But I suspect if I, although this is one of
[Amit Varma]: my sort of pet themes, if I continue talking more with you about this, my listeners will
[Amit Varma]: be that, hey, that's not the subject of the book, kindly get on with it. So, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and it's interesting, you just spoke about how when you were in college in the late 80s,
[Amit Varma]: when Mundell commission happened and your classmates approach and all and in the book,
[Amit Varma]: you also said something very interesting there, which is that none of them asked you anything
[Amit Varma]: about yourself that even if they had their anti Muslim prejudices and all of that as
[Amit Varma]: evident in their politics, you know, you almost wish that they would ask you what are Muslims
[Amit Varma]: like, what is it like to be a Muslim and they never asked you, which was in contrast to
[Amit Varma]: something which, you know, you described from your school days, when you write, quote, their
[Amit Varma]: questions covered the entire gamut from genuine curiosity to inherited prejudice. Why do you
[Amit Varma]: fast during Ramzan? Do you put meat in all your food? Some questions stemmed from stereotyping.
[Amit Varma]: Why don't Muslims bathe every day? And some were downright ridiculous. How many mothers
[Amit Varma]: do you have? Stop quote. And so my question to you is that, you know, on the one hand,
[Amit Varma]: you are growing up in a Muslim family in a Muslim Mahalla. At the same time, your family
[Amit Varma]: is kind of insulated itself from the street around it, like you describe how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: all the rooms would have a window open to the inner courtyard, but none to the outside
[Amit Varma]: because you know, like you mentioned earlier, you weren't supposed to venture out, it wasn't
[Amit Varma]: safe, it wasn't great. So what was your personal view of Islam as a kid growing up? How big
[Amit Varma]: a role did it play in your life? And how did you imbibe it? What did it mean to you? And
[Amit Varma]: what did it mean to the other kids around you, like your cousins and so on?
[Guest]: You know, when we were growing up, we were initiated into religion in a very simplistic
[Guest]: manner. As kids, we were taught the first Kalma, which is just two lines. And that was
[Guest]: enough. Beyond that, there was no formal initiation in terms of learning how to say the namaz
[Guest]: or learning to read the Quran, which is what happens in most Muslim households. You start
[Guest]: learning the alphabets from a very young age. And in a conservative Muslim family, a child
[Guest]: is expected to finish the entire reading of the Quran by the time she is seven years old.
[Guest]: But in my family, that never happened. Not just my immediate siblings, but my cousins
[Guest]: also, we never did that. Though we had a mosque right next to our house. And I grew up listening
[Guest]: to the Muslims call from childhood. So much so because I used to hear it five times a
[Guest]: day and sometimes more than that, because on special occasions, there used to be late
[Guest]: night prayers as well. And because of which I knew it by heart. And sometimes, as part
[Guest]: of our playing, we used to do a little bit of play acting. So one of my cousins would
[Guest]: pretend to be the Hafiz who would give the call to prayer. So he would recite the prayer
[Guest]: and we would join in. So it was all in good fun. Why we were not initiated into religion?
[Guest]: Probably because my grandfather himself had a very laid back attitude to Islam. Though
[Guest]: he was very diligent with his prayers and used to go to the mosque whenever he could.
[Guest]: He never forced any of his children to do that. So his children didn't force their kids
[Guest]: to do anything. It was left in a very laid back, easy manner that you recite the Kalma
[Guest]: whenever you're worried or you're scared or before going to bed, just recite the Kalma
[Guest]: and go to bed. That is a habit I have even today. I recite the Kalma before I go to bed.
[Guest]: But that is how we were introduced to religion. It was only years later when we had moved
[Guest]: to our new house and we were moving in a different direction from my cousins, that my uncles
[Guest]: who were in the mohalla, maybe because there was no adult supervision. I mean, they themselves
[Guest]: were adults with kids, but maybe because there was no umbrella of moderation, which my grandfather
[Guest]: had provided to the family. And then my father, they kind of drifted first into the neighborhood.
[Guest]: They made friends in the neighborhood. Then the children, their kids, my younger cousins,
[Guest]: they started playing with the neighborhood kids. And then a religious teacher, Hafiz
[Guest]: was asked to teach my cousins. The reason he was asked was also because Hafiz had started
[Guest]: to come to our house because my grandfather's illness and it was thought that his presence
[Guest]: would calm my grandfather and would make his day a little less boring. But despite the
[Guest]: presence of a religious teacher in our house, my parents did not encourage us to learn anything
[Guest]: from him. But my cousins started doing that. So that difference in this approach to religion,
[Guest]: I think also had a little to do with the time that we were living in. By the late 80s, a
[Guest]: lot of social situations had started to become a little bit shaded. There was a little consciousness
[Guest]: about who you were. The Ram Mandir campaign had started. 84 onwards, there was this Babri
[Guest]: issue had suddenly become a big issue in U.P. The newspapers used to be full of that. Hindi
[Guest]: newspapers would be full of stuff like appeasement of minorities, as they would say, alp sankhekon
[Guest]: ka tushrikaran. So people were becoming a little conscious of their identities. And
[Guest]: maybe this initiation into religion was also a kind of a defiance that this is who we are.
[Guest]: So I think that is why my, okay, there's another thing which I feel, because like my father,
[Guest]: my uncles were also semi-literate. So my father worked on himself and he studied the languages
[Guest]: and his aspirations were different from his brother's. My uncles didn't do that. So they
[Guest]: remained in their semi-literate Hindi-dominated world, Indian-dominated world. And as I mentioned
[Guest]: earlier, the exposure to our world at that time was through the Hindi newspapers and
[Guest]: the Urdu newspapers, and they both had nuance towards identity. So while the Hindi newspapers
[Guest]: were conscious of its readership, which is a Hindi readership, and they imagined that
[Guest]: this readership would probably like a story or a bent which favoured the Hindu communal
[Guest]: sentiment, the Urdu newspapers were at the same time working on the Muslim sentiments.
[Guest]: So their exposure was getting increasingly sharpened through this sort of writing. Probably
[Guest]: that was another reason why they, and then subsequently my younger cousins, were drifting
[Guest]: more and more into a Muslim milieu. The friends they chose also were traditionally Muslims.
[Guest]: Though they went to the same schools as I went, I never had a Muslim friend in school.
[Guest]: I mean one of the reasons was there was hardly any other Muslim child in my class. At least
[Guest]: as long as I was in the convent, I was always the only Muslim girl in my class. Subsequently
[Guest]: I moved to a co-educational institution, again a church-run institution. There was another
[Guest]: Muslim in my class, but somehow I never got along with a Muslim and there was no desire
[Guest]: that I should befriend a Muslim person. Similarly, that person also never felt that she should
[Guest]: have a Muslim friend, so I had a different group of friends. But my younger cousins,
[Guest]: I realised gradually that they used to veer towards Muslims more than any other community
[Guest]: for the simple reason they felt comfortable with probably voicing their political positions,
[Guest]: they felt secure in a Muslim environment. That was also one of the reasons that for
[Guest]: a very long time my uncles didn't shift out of the mohalla, though they had means to shift
[Guest]: out. It's not that they were not doing well in their businesses, but they had grown comfortable
[Guest]: in that. When I was growing up, we were not comfortable in that, which is why we had kept
[Guest]: our house isolated. It was almost like an island in that mohalla. But they had become
[Guest]: comfortable. They had become comfortable going and visiting their neighbours' houses and
[Guest]: they were happy that neighbours were coming to their houses. So that was a difference.
[Amit Varma]: So before I go on to my next question, a quick aside. You know, my favourite sentence in
[Amit Varma]: your book is actually, you know, a great example of show-don't-tell and it's this lovely sentence
[Amit Varma]: about your grandfather where you wrote, quote, during winter he used to shell pine nuts during
[Amit Varma]: the day so he could reward us with fistfuls of shelled nuts in the evening, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it's such a lovely sentence because it tells you so much about the person and his
[Amit Varma]: love for his grandkids and all of that. And I love that. Now, you know, it's interesting
[Amit Varma]: that when I was sort of reading about the arc of your family, almost through the generations,
[Amit Varma]: you talk about how initially, you know, your ancestors were, you know, in a settlement
[Amit Varma]: outside Agra. And then your grandfather married a Syed, as you said, and, you know, wanted
[Amit Varma]: to be upwardly mobile, moved to Agra for that reason. But even moving to Agra wasn't the
[Amit Varma]: mobility alone, the mobility had to continue. So even though they had to move into a mahalla,
[Amit Varma]: they've kind of kept themselves apart from everything outside. In fact, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: describe how that lane outside was described to you as, quote, riddled with poverty, illiteracy,
[Amit Varma]: backwardness and unthinkable danger, stop quote, which strikes me how many Hindus would
[Amit Varma]: describe Muslim areas, even today. And then that further mobility happens where your nuclear
[Amit Varma]: family and a younger uncle, you move to a separate place. And here, what is sort of
[Amit Varma]: interesting to me is that you've gotten away from this sort of milieu, you've become mobile,
[Amit Varma]: your dad has become very successful and rich. And you've moved, you know, almost out of
[Amit Varma]: the ghetto, as it were. And, you know, you're living your individual lives. And at the same
[Amit Varma]: time, you described how your other uncles with their families remain back and they kind
[Amit Varma]: of got drawn more and more into fundamentalism, in a sense, they open the doors and the windows
[Amit Varma]: and let the lane inside in a metaphorical sense, I suppose, and that sort of journey
[Amit Varma]: is happening. And they also then become more into the religion in terms of those other
[Amit Varma]: sort of aspects of it, like you describe how for you, what Islam meant, as you've said,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned how it came to you by driblets, which I found a, you know, wonderful phrase
[Amit Varma]: in this regard. And you've mentioned how those sort of values you imbibe with the values
[Amit Varma]: of charity that you know, during the holy month, you do charity, you feed the poor,
[Amit Varma]: all of those things. But your cousins are taking in a sort of more fundamental version.
[Amit Varma]: And what is sort of starkest about this distinction was that when you are 16, your father is giving
[Amit Varma]: you prospectuses of universities abroad, because he wants you to go outside. And you describe
[Amit Varma]: how when you are writing an admission essay for one of them, one of your cousins in the
[Amit Varma]: mahala is being felicitated for memorizing the entire Quran. And the reason this all
[Amit Varma]: of this seemed fascinating to me is that the denouement that this comes to is an incident
[Amit Varma]: where your father realizes that all this still doesn't insulate him from being a Muslim,
[Amit Varma]: that in India, there is, you know, there are still things which can sort of go wrong and
[Amit Varma]: all the riches in the world can't save you, you know, and this, of course, you've described
[Amit Varma]: so eloquently in your book about how your house was attacked during a riot, and you
[Amit Varma]: dialed all the numbers. And, you know, your father told you gave you all the numbers said
[Amit Varma]: dial all these numbers, people were outside with stones, and all of your father's, you
[Amit Varma]: know, friends did not pick up the phone at that time did not help. Tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about that and sort of the realization that comes out of that because this is like a deeply
[Amit Varma]: poignant story. This is about, you know, different arcs, you know, you have the people who stayed
[Amit Varma]: back in the mahala, you have the person who's escaped and who thinks that okay, he's beyond
[Amit Varma]: all of this. And yet, all of you are in a sense equally in danger in this India that
[Amit Varma]: we are in. So tell me a little bit which year was this what was happening and all of that,
[Guest]: you know, we, I never thought of myself as a Muslim while I was growing up, even when
[Guest]: we lived in the mahala. So when I described the lanes, or when I have described the mahala,
[Guest]: it was not something that I was condemning my own. Even at that time, when we were growing
[Guest]: up, my family always thought that, why do they live like this? What is wrong with them?
[Guest]: Why are the lanes kept so dirty? So we, they wanted to insulate us from what they viewed
[Guest]: was people of a certain kind, not necessarily Muslims, though they were Muslims, all right,
[Guest]: but we did not see ourselves as Muslims and we did not see them as Muslims. We just always
[Guest]: thought that these people are less civil than we are and they have less ambitions and less
[Guest]: desire to go beyond what they have inherited from their forefathers. So when we moved to
[Guest]: this new area, which in India areas like this are called colonies, so we moved to this Hindu
[Guest]: colony, we did not think at that point that we were the only Muslim in a Hindu colony.
[Guest]: We were not conscious of our Muslimness and to our neighbor's credit, they also never
[Guest]: made us conscious of our Muslimness. We got along fabulously with them and my parents
[Guest]: were socializing with them. They were used to come to our house and there was a lot of
[Guest]: intermingling in addition to special occasions. It's not that we met each other only on special
[Guest]: occasions. There was a daily sort of a thing. My brother used to go out to play because
[Guest]: now it was not a mohalla, so we were allowed to go out and play. And all the playmates
[Guest]: were the neighborhood boys. So we were never conscious of the fact that we were different
[Guest]: from the rest of them. A small example, so much so that a lot of neighborhood youngsters
[Guest]: were older, much older than me, but roughly my younger uncle's age. They used to socialize
[Guest]: with him also because my uncle had a car so they could hitch a ride and go for a night
[Guest]: out. So that was, it was never considered that we were not part of this new society
[Guest]: that we had embraced. When the 80s progressed and this atmospherics had changed so drastically,
[Guest]: it was the first time that I actually became conscious that people were talking of Hindu
[Guest]: and Muslim and in such harsh terms. My mother was into a lot of social work. My father was
[Guest]: a big philanthropist. So she used to go to a lot of public functions and events. I remember
[Guest]: sometimes in 88 or 89 probably, I don't know the year exactly, there was a big police function
[Guest]: in Agra. And my mother was invited to that function as one of the delegates or some attendee.
[Guest]: But my mother used to work with the Agra district jail people and she was doing some work in
[Guest]: adult literacy with the women, the families of the jail inmates. Because at district jail
[Guest]: people, most people who were there, the prisoners, they were there serving life sentences. So
[Guest]: the jail had built a small enclosure there for the families and kids to live. So my mother
[Guest]: used to, with a group of people, she was working in that area. So she was invited to this event,
[Guest]: police, Agra police event, and I tagged along with her because I had nothing better to do.
[Guest]: And BP Singhal, who was the brother of Ashok Singhal, he retired as a DG police UP. He
[Guest]: was one of the speakers at the function. And the kind of language he used at that event
[Guest]: and the way he spoke, it was beyond shocking. I could not believe that in a public event
[Guest]: where all kinds of people are present, somebody could speak like this and not feel embarrassed,
[Guest]: not feel concerned that some people may get hurt or they may feel bad the way you're talking
[Guest]: about them. And the fact that we are sitting there, it didn't occur to him that he should
[Guest]: not be talking like this. And then there was stray slogan shouting. So every time somebody
[Guest]: would shout a slogan or say something, I would turn back and see who's saying this. But obviously
[Guest]: you can't see it. It's a huge crowd. So that was very disturbing. I had not imagined something
[Guest]: like this could happen in a public space. I thought probably if even people feel like
[Guest]: that, they would talk about this inside their homes and be mindful that nobody else hears
[Guest]: this. Even in my own family, extended family, I used to hear things like, you know, there
[Guest]: is all of us are prejudiced. We kind of inherit our prejudices. So we would talk. I mean,
[Guest]: my family members would often talk about Hindus or Christians or Sikhs in a particular manner,
[Guest]: but it would always be inside the house and it was always among the close family members.
[Guest]: It was not meant for public consumption. But here this was being said loud and clear in
[Guest]: an event where all kinds of people were present. So I realized that things were really not
[Guest]: right. Things were going bad. And then these audio cassettes came of Advani and Sadhvi
[Guest]: Ritambara and their speeches. They were being distributed. One of my father's closest friends,
[Guest]: all my father's friends were also Hindus. So he started distributing the cassettes and
[Guest]: then he would have discussions with my father, which again is a measure of how comfortable
[Guest]: he was with my father and how comfortable my father was with him. And he would discuss
[Guest]: the content of the speeches. He would talk about barbary, he would talk about destruction
[Guest]: of temples. And my father would say, no, no, it's all nonsense. And they both would have
[Guest]: these arguments, but they would have these arguments that Somnath was destroyed so many
[Guest]: times. And so my father would reason out that, look, it was political. And maybe how would
[Guest]: he know every time that the temple was flushed with funds? If he was coming at the time when
[Guest]: the temple was flushed, then somebody was informing him. That is how he was coming all
[Guest]: the way from Afghanistan. But the good part was that though their paths were diverging
[Guest]: a little, politically they were getting distant, they still had this history of friendship
[Guest]: between them. So they could talk. But when I came to Delhi, nobody spoke to me about
[Guest]: this. Nobody asked me any question, which is what disturbed me the most, that if you
[Guest]: have any questions about Muslims, if you think that Muslims as people are different in a
[Guest]: particular way because this is what they've done wrong, then if you ask me, maybe I can
[Guest]: find out the answer for you if I don't know. But that did not happen. So going back to
[Guest]: the attack, the 1990, I was already in college and I had already seen what was happening
[Guest]: in Delhi and my classmates. And all of them were voting BJP. All of us were first-time
[Guest]: voters and they said, no, no, how can we vote for anybody else? We vote for the BJP. And
[Guest]: whatever people may say or justify, the truth is the history of the BJP origin song is it
[Guest]: stems from otherization of certain group of people in India. They've always done politics
[Guest]: which pits community against community. So nobody can whitewash this part about the BJP.
[Guest]: So despite this, if some people are convinced that they only want to vote for that party,
[Guest]: it means that you at some level agree with them or you at some level believe that what
[Guest]: they're saying is correct. So it was this sort of a background that I was called back
[Guest]: home and our neighbors were coming and warning my parents that something is going to happen.
[Guest]: You go back to your house in the mahala. Violence had broken out in Agra in certain areas. One
[Guest]: of my uncle's friends, his shop, he had a shoe shop that was burned. So we all were
[Guest]: quite anxious. Finally, my father said, okay, we didn't want to go back to the mahala. Because
[Guest]: once you leave, in any case, it was a small house. And once we left, the rooms that we
[Guest]: had was now occupied by my cousins and my other uncle's family. So then my father booked
[Guest]: us in Mughal Sheraton and my mother drove us to the hotel. Then sometimes in the late
[Guest]: afternoon, she got very anxious. And this was the day when our neighbors had persistently
[Guest]: pushed my father that, you know, we have information and there's nothing we can do. And my father
[Guest]: saw their point. You know, you can't argue with a mob and you don't know what the mob
[Guest]: would do or what the size of the mob would be. And it doesn't really make sense that
[Guest]: you expect your neighbors to stick their necks out. They could probably, but why take a chance?
[Guest]: So my father sent us off, but we came back in the afternoon because my mother was very,
[Guest]: very anxious. And sure enough, in the evening, there was a lot of slogan shouting happening.
[Guest]: So my father gave me this telephone book and he said, just call up these people, keep calling
[Guest]: them up and tell them that our house is likely to be under attack. And these are the people
[Guest]: my father had been socializing with for many years. You know, in a small town, whenever
[Guest]: there is a new DM or a new DIG, it's customary. I mean, they also come and they ask their
[Guest]: office staff that who are the people that we should know. And the business families,
[Guest]: they also feel that it's a matter of prestige that you're friends with the district authorities.
[Guest]: So apart from the prestige part, it's also some sort of insurance cover that if you need,
[Guest]: you can ask these guys to help you. So we knew most of the district authorities very,
[Guest]: very well. But that evening, nobody answered any calls, even though I called up the residences
[Guest]: also, but nobody answered any calls. And around dusk when it had just about to get a bit dark,
[Guest]: a mob started walking towards our house. And our house is, we have a very narrow, a short
[Guest]: porch and then there's a gate. And the inside door has a glass panel on one side. So from
[Guest]: the glass panel, you can see the porch and the gate and the road beyond. So my brother,
[Guest]: younger brother and I, we ran to the glass panel and we started looking out and we saw
[Guest]: this big group of people carrying fire torches walking towards our house. And my mother was
[Guest]: screaming, she said, come back in, come back in, because she thought we may get hurt. And
[Guest]: they came and stopped in front of the gate and they were shouting slogans. And then we
[Guest]: identified this neighborhood boy and we came back, we ran inside and said, oh, this boy
[Guest]: is there. So my father was very sanguine. He said, oh, so obviously they won't do anything
[Guest]: because this boy, he knows us so well. But then they started throwing stones and that
[Guest]: is when everybody panicked because the distance between the gate and the house is not much.
[Guest]: And my father had a licensed revolver. So my uncle knew where it was kept. He went in
[Guest]: my father's room, he took it out and he tried to go to the rooftop and he said, I'll just
[Guest]: fire a few shots in the air. And my father had better sense. He shouted and screamed
[Guest]: after him and my mother also kind of ran after him to pull him back physically. Father said
[Guest]: that if you fire one shot, they'll burn the house down. Finally, my uncle calmed down
[Guest]: and he came back. And after a bit of stone pelting and they destroyed the car which was
[Guest]: parked outside, the windscreen, everything was shattered. Our glass windows were, even
[Guest]: the first floor window, the study which used to face the main road and which used to be
[Guest]: my favorite place to sit and look at the road and the traffic. It was very badly damaged.
[Guest]: The windows were crashed, the stones had landed inside the study, the sitting area. We had
[Guest]: huge glass windows. So they had kind of broken everything. So finally, after a bit of stone
[Guest]: throwing, I think it must have lasted about 10-15 minutes, the crowd dispersed. And then
[Guest]: at that point, my call got through and somebody answered from the SSP's house. And they said,
[Guest]: the SSP didn't come on the line. Probably he was busy because there were riots going
[Guest]: on all over the city. So somebody answered the call and they said, we'll send a patrol
[Guest]: party to your house, which came very late in the night, well past 10.30 or so. So my
[Guest]: uncle and my father went to speak with the policemen and they said, no, no, we'll include
[Guest]: your house in our nightly rounds, so nothing will happen. Don't worry, go to sleep. Obviously,
[Guest]: we couldn't have slept with so much of fear all around. And then next morning, there was
[Guest]: a police cordon and search operation was carried out in that mahalla where my uncles were.
[Guest]: And all men, and they didn't distinguish between men and boys, they were rounded up and taken
[Guest]: away. So my cousin, who's six years younger than me, he was also picked up. He must have
[Guest]: been 13 or something. And fortunately, there was an elderly constable who took pity on
[Guest]: him or he probably recognized him from belonging to this family. So he allowed him to jump
[Guest]: from the jeep when it was turning on the main road. And from there, he walked to our house
[Guest]: and informed us that this is what has happened. So my uncle and my mother and I, we, because
[Guest]: by this time I was studying to be a journalist and I had assumed the role of a reporter already.
[Guest]: So I tagged along and we went to the house and it was absolutely quiet. There was no
[Guest]: noise at all. And this was a house which was always so noisy. People were screaming on
[Guest]: top of their voices. There was no privacy for anything. And it was absolutely eerie.
[Guest]: There was no noise, no sound. So we opened the door, my mother pushed the door and it
[Guest]: opened into that central courtyard. And there were things strewn all over. There was a television
[Guest]: set, there was a cricket bat, there was a lot of things lying there. And my mother obviously
[Guest]: in total panic, she screamed my auntie's name. And they were all huddling in one of the storerooms,
[Guest]: in the ground floor room. So they came running out and everybody was crying. And then they
[Guest]: narrated how the police had come early in the morning and taken everybody away. My father
[Guest]: and my uncle, they went round to various places. My father went to the DIG's office, but my
[Guest]: uncle went to another, the local police station and they kept denying that anything like this
[Guest]: had happened. But finally, my father managed to speak with the DIG and he said, nothing
[Guest]: will happen. I assure you that your brothers will come back. They came back late in the
[Guest]: afternoon and they were quite badly bruised. All the men from the neighbourhood, they came
[Guest]: back in the course of the night and the next morning. They were even badly hurt. A few
[Guest]: were hobbling and probably some had broken bones. Fortunately, my uncles didn't have
[Guest]: any broken bones, but they were bruised. They were hit on their calves and on their backs
[Guest]: by batons or something. So they had all those blue and black belts on their backs. And my
[Guest]: younger uncle had a cut on his forehead, very close to the eyelid. So that was a very harrowing
[Guest]: thing because all of us kind of got together and was wondering that you think that if you're
[Guest]: living in a mixed community, you would be secure because it's upper middle class society
[Guest]: or a colony where people of a certain class live. So it will be insulated from petty roadside
[Guest]: violence, but that doesn't happen. And then you think that in a Muslim mohalla, everybody
[Guest]: is a Muslim, so you have security in numbers. But then if the police gets after you, then
[Guest]: even that is no longer secure. Probably a mohalla is secure from a riot because a mob,
[Guest]: a Hindu mob will not enter a mohalla thing because of preponderance of Muslim population.
[Guest]: But what do you do if the police enters? So basically, if you have to be targeted, if
[Guest]: there is a political directive that a particular lesson has to be taught or a few hours notice,
[Guest]: you know, it's a window of a few hours that you give, okay, just do whatever you want
[Guest]: and then the law enforcement will take its course. So if that kind of a thing happens
[Guest]: in a situation, then it doesn't matter what distance you have traveled, your education,
[Guest]: your financial situation, your thinking, your world view, even your modernity or progressiveness,
[Guest]: none of that matters at all.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I was struck by this trade-off which should not exist in the first place.
[Amit Varma]: It should not be a trade-off. But it's a trade-off that comes up when your, you know, dad is
[Amit Varma]: thinking of shifting your family from the mohalla and you write at that point, quote,
[Amit Varma]: we didn't know where we would be more secure, in an upscale Hindu majority neighborhood
[Amit Varma]: where the privilege of the residents would throw a security blanket around us, or in
[Amit Varma]: a Muslim majority lower middle class mohalla where the numbers would insulate us, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote, which sort of reminds me of something that, you know, when I was chatting with Annie
[Amit Varma]: Zaidi in my last episode, you know, there's this poignant quote from her book about home
[Amit Varma]: is not just a place where you are safe, it is a place where you can be visible. And that
[Amit Varma]: sort of, you know, strikes me in this context. And later on, after, you know, the riot happened
[Amit Varma]: and all of this happened, you wrote, quote, in the family comprising six brothers and
[Amit Varma]: four sisters, these two men had most visibly shed their ghettoized Muslim identities. They
[Amit Varma]: were at home in the social, cultural and economic life of Agra, hobnobbing with the who's who
[Amit Varma]: of the city. And yet, when it came to communal division, they were nothing but Muslims, forever
[Amit Varma]: immigrants, forever scapegoats, stop quote. And then you talk about how, as this period
[Amit Varma]: progresses, and obviously Hindu nationalism is on the rise, Hindutva nationalism rather,
[Amit Varma]: and you talk about, you write, quote, demonstrative religion was all around us. As a benign Ram
[Amit Varma]: Ram was replaced by the militant Jai Shri Ram, people started huddling with their own
[Amit Varma]: kind. A lot of business class Muslims who had stepped out of the mohallas and built
[Amit Varma]: swanky houses in mixed localities, returned to the smothering comforts of narrow lanes
[Amit Varma]: and close minds, stop quote, which is of course, not just literal, but metaphorical. Tell me
[Amit Varma]: about this kind of shift that now happens because it strikes me that this is going to
[Amit Varma]: be the natural tendency that if I am attacked, if I am seen as another, I will obviously
[Amit Varma]: look for comfort from, you know, those of my own kind. So it almost makes this ghettoization
[Amit Varma]: completely natural. And obviously, you know, my sort of reading of, you know, the history
[Amit Varma]: of the last couple of hundred years, and we'll discuss that in much more detail because you've
[Amit Varma]: written about that in your book as well. But my reading is that these fissures have always
[Amit Varma]: kind of existed, but it's only now that in a sense politics has caught up with culture.
[Amit Varma]: So is that what is happening? Is it a vicious circle? Is there this increased ghettoization,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what was your own response to this? And what was the response of others around
[Amit Varma]: you?
[Guest]: You know, there is, I would like to make a distinction between a Muslim majority area
[Guest]: and a ghetto. Now, a lot of Indian towns, they have community specific areas, which
[Guest]: have grown organically, which have developed organically in a city, like in Delhi, you
[Guest]: have Dajama Masjid area, or you have Nizamuddin West area, which were always part of the city.
[Guest]: Or in Bombay, you have Muhammad Ali Road, or you have Bindi Bazaar. So Muslims have
[Guest]: traditionally lived here. They did not go there because they were scared of living anywhere
[Guest]: else. They have lived there for generations, and even rich, prosperous Muslims live there.
[Guest]: The facilities, which other areas in the neighborhood have, are probably available to these areas
[Guest]: also. As an example, a ghetto would be a place like Mumbra, outside Bombay, which emerges
[Guest]: after an incident of communal violence, because people move there for security reasons. A
[Guest]: Muslim majority area, people live there not so much for security reasons, but because
[Guest]: they have lived there, they're comfortable there. The kind of people, they've grown up
[Guest]: there, live, are all around them. They identify themselves more as Muslims, so they're comfortable
[Guest]: with Muslims around. Their eating habits are similar, their mosque is there, so they can
[Guest]: go there. There's a madarsa there for the children. So it's a comfort factor. So most
[Guest]: small towns in India have these Muslim areas. So the mahala which I grew up was dirty and
[Guest]: all of that, but it was not a ghetto in the real sense of a ghetto as you find in Delhi
[Guest]: now in the Okhla region. Because Okhla area is a ghetto, you find this huge presence of
[Guest]: police there, and a policeman in plain clothes. They are basically spies, they are basically
[Guest]: from the intelligence agencies, they're trying keeping tabs. This is the area where, if you
[Guest]: have an address of Okhla or Batla House in Delhi, you are less likely to get a bank loan.
[Guest]: You're not 100% not going to get a credit card. The delivery services, even a pizza
[Guest]: delivery is not possible. The pizza delivery boy would say, okay, you come at some point
[Guest]: and I'll leave the pizza there. So these are the places which are not organic to a city.
[Guest]: These are the places that have developed because the law enforcement agencies have not acted
[Guest]: on time and the government has not done anything to prevent this sort of pervasive fear from
[Guest]: taking grip over the people. What happened in Agra, after this incident of 1990, that
[Guest]: was the only Hindu-Muslim communal riot in Agra. Agra has no history of communal violence.
[Guest]: Even during partition, there was no communal violence in Agra. So it has always been very
[Guest]: insulated from communal prejudice. I mean, people may have been prejudiced, but it was
[Guest]: never vocalized. But all this happened in the late 80s when it was being vocalized,
[Guest]: early 90s, where people have started talking in this very criminally charged and harsh,
[Guest]: impolite, uncivil language. So this, even today, Agra has a lot of places where Muslims
[Guest]: live predominantly. And after the 1990 violence, a lot of Muslims who had moved to fancy swanky
[Guest]: places like our family, they went back. A few of them, I have heard from my brothers
[Guest]: that have returned to their houses because they didn't sell their houses. They just went
[Guest]: back to the family homes. They have, by the mid-2000s, 2004, 2005, when they thought that
[Guest]: things are getting a little better, they came back. And probably there is a political point
[Guest]: here because you see the government, which were in power in this period, both in the
[Guest]: UP and at the center. So maybe that gave them some sort of a confidence that we will not
[Guest]: be subjected to violence. But all that changed again, 2014 onwards, when the fear of the
[Guest]: 90s has been not just reinforced, it has multiplied manifold. Because even in the 90s, when there
[Guest]: was violence, you feared for your life and you feared for your property for the duration
[Guest]: of the violence. It was a riot which went on for two days or three days. You feared
[Guest]: for that duration and then you rebuilt your life whichever way it was and you moved on.
[Guest]: What is happening now is that the fear is not limited to the duration of a riot because
[Guest]: now there is no riot. Now it is something which you are subjected to on a daily basis.
[Guest]: So you hear people saying that in public transport, we don't greet each other with Salam-o-Alaikum
[Guest]: because we don't want to draw attention to ourselves. Or people not carrying food from
[Guest]: home. A very senior surgeon told me in the book that he is scared of bringing Eid food
[Guest]: from his hometown when he comes to Delhi after Eid celebrations because he worries for his
[Guest]: family. So this fear that even privilege is no insurance was not there earlier. One of
[Guest]: the reasons that my family, my father thought that we will be safe because he felt confident
[Guest]: that we are too privileged. I mean, if we can afford to go in a five-star hotel to stay,
[Guest]: then you can imagine in our mind, we believe that the poor are affected. It's not people
[Guest]: like us will not be affected. But that doesn't happen any longer. This divisive violence
[Guest]: is now indiscriminate. So when we talk about Muslims being caught between this lack of
[Guest]: choice about where to live, it's partly because of this normalization of prejudice. We are
[Guest]: not embarrassed by our prejudice anymore. We believe that what our prejudice tells us
[Guest]: is actually the fact. We don't even pause to consider that maybe it's nonsense. Maybe
[Guest]: it's just something which we've heard or it's hearsay. Because of this, you hear instances
[Guest]: of Muslims not finding accommodation. But again, it's a big city phenomenon. I don't
[Guest]: think in a small city like Agra, Muslims live everywhere. It's unthinkable. I've never come
[Guest]: across anybody telling me that they were not able to find accommodation in a place which
[Guest]: was predominantly non-Muslim. So this is a big city place where probably the size of
[Guest]: the city, the insecurity which a big city instills in you, the economic challenges which
[Guest]: it imposes upon you, maybe it is all driven by that. For want of anything else, you channel
[Guest]: or you channelize your dislike for a certain group of people. So you deny them equal opportunities,
[Guest]: you deny them accommodation, you deny them civility. So what is the choice then? Then
[Guest]: they have to go and look for a place in a ghetto, even if they don't get along with
[Guest]: that sort of Muslim population, even if they're forward-looking educated people. I'll give
[Guest]: you an example. When I first came to Delhi as a student, I lived as a paying guest with
[Guest]: a Muslim family for a year and then I moved into my own flat. My father rented a flat
[Guest]: in South Extension. Now South Extension was in Delhi, is a South Delhi area. I don't know
[Guest]: how familiar you are with the Delhi social hierarchy of places. So it's a reasonably
[Guest]: fancy place and with hardly any Muslims there. I had no problem finding accommodation there
[Guest]: and then I moved to another place. I lived in rented accommodation for nearly 11 years
[Guest]: before we bought an apartment here. I never had any problem finding a rented accommodation
[Guest]: and all my landlords were non-Muslims and nobody ever asked me to vacate the flat. I
[Guest]: mean I moved for, because of my jobs, I moved from one place to another and I changed three
[Guest]: apartments and in each I lived for nearly three to four years and I never had any problems.
[Guest]: Nobody told me don't cook non-vegetarian food, nobody said anything. But when my cousins
[Guest]: came in 2007 and they came from an even smaller town than Agra, they came from Menpuri and
[Guest]: they couldn't find accommodation. Every time they would approach a broker, they were told
[Guest]: go to Batla House, go to Okla. They did manage to live in East Delhi but with great difficulty.
[Guest]: Finding accommodation for them was always a huge struggle and even if they did find
[Guest]: accommodation within a year or so, the landlord or the landlady used to pester them to vacate
[Guest]: the place because things have changed so much.
[Amit Varma]: That's a very subtle distinction that you drew between a ghetto and a Muslim majority
[Amit Varma]: area. I mean I was just using it in a general kind of sense but I find that that distinction
[Amit Varma]: that you made is important because it also tells you a little bit about why it has kind
[Amit Varma]: of formed and for what I've seen happening in India over the last couple of decades and
[Amit Varma]: what you alluded to where people are more open with their prejudices, where they are
[Amit Varma]: expressing their prejudices while earlier they would hide it. The sociologist Timur
[Amit Varma]: Kuran wrote a book in 1999 called I think Public Lies and Private Truths where he coined
[Amit Varma]: this phrase called preference falsification and one of the illustrations he gave was Soviet
[Amit Varma]: Union where what happened was that everybody hated the state but nobody could say it because
[Amit Varma]: a neighbor could you know tell on them. So they would keep it to themselves and that
[Amit Varma]: was preference falsification and then one day suddenly the floodgates opened and everybody
[Amit Varma]: found that hey everybody thinks like me and what took place was what Kuran calls a preference
[Amit Varma]: cascade where suddenly everybody was free to express what they felt about the state
[Amit Varma]: and almost overnight the Soviet Union kind of collapsed and there seems to be like one
[Amit Varma]: of the reasons I think you know Modi came to power and so strongly and took such a stronghold
[Amit Varma]: is that there has been a preference cascade now is that many people were what I call closet
[Amit Varma]: bigots that many people had these prejudices they would not express it in polite society
[Amit Varma]: because hey you know you thought that it won't go down well and all of that but then you
[Amit Varma]: reach this turning point where you realize that you know the majority thinks like you.
[Amit Varma]: It's okay in fact not only can you say these horrible things but they will win you brownie
[Amit Varma]: points like you described listening to that speech of BP Singhal that that's probably
[Amit Varma]: an early manifestation of that but today you know if you look at our politics you don't
[Amit Varma]: need dog whistles anymore you know people will openly say things which they could only
[Amit Varma]: have alluded to in the past and as for what is happening in our cities and of course in
[Amit Varma]: Mumbai this is well documented various journalists over the years have done stories on how it's
[Amit Varma]: hard for Muslims or single people or women or whatever to rent kind of flats in Mumbai
[Amit Varma]: so I have a sort of larger question that I've thought about in the past I don't know even
[Amit Varma]: know if it's a question or a lament and it's really for all my listeners to comment on
[Amit Varma]: as much as for you is that you know if you look at the level of an individual flat owner
[Amit Varma]: right she has a right to give her flat to whoever she wants so she can say that I want
[Amit Varma]: people of my community only or I want people who won't cook non-veg because hey it's my
[Amit Varma]: flat I don't like it and so on and so forth and at an individual level these individual
[Amit Varma]: decisions get made but when we are a society with such prejudices then the overall outcome
[Amit Varma]: can be really bad the overall outcome can be this sort of cloistering of different communities
[Amit Varma]: in different areas which actually exacerbates these prejudices because then if you're a
[Amit Varma]: you know a good vegetarian Hindu growing up in a middle-class household you're never encountering
[Amit Varma]: another Muslim because they don't live anywhere around you and the prejudices deepen and they
[Amit Varma]: become worse now you know this is not possible to police for and I don't think you know the
[Amit Varma]: state should use coercion to sort of decide what people do with their individual flat
[Amit Varma]: so it's a bunch of individuals making rational decisions which leads to an absolutely horrible
[Amit Varma]: social outcome and the only way out therefore to me it would seem is that you have to change
[Amit Varma]: it at the level of society where people feel differently about this but right now we are
[Amit Varma]: stuck in this very bad equilibrium where there is where we are in a vicious circle there
[Amit Varma]: is distrust and hate on all sides so I don't know the way out so it's not a question it's
[Guest]: probably a lament do you have any thoughts on this you know I had heard Kefi Azbi at
[Guest]: one of the Mushairas this was in the mid 90s and he said that if every Muslim has four
[Guest]: or five Hindu friends and every Hindu has at least one or two Muslim friends this whole
[Guest]: communal problem will end because then you get to see one another you get to grow up
[Guest]: with one another and understand each other this is why I earlier when I was referring
[Guest]: to my exposure to Hindi literature and Urdu literature because I realized that this Ganga
[Guest]: Jamni that now has become a very bad word for a certain group of people this was a living
[Guest]: reality it was not just limited to going to a festival to somebody's house it was something
[Guest]: which was very organic to you you did not look at people by their religion you saw them
[Guest]: by as your neighbor or you saw them as your business colleague or as a partner business
[Guest]: partner or a shop where you trust the shop owner and you always buy your groceries from
[Guest]: him or a vegetable vendor so it was very natural kind of intermingling of communities without
[Guest]: any thought about a person's religion religion was in a private space even the namaz the
[Guest]: azan which now has started bothering people nobody ever thought it was bothering them
[Guest]: this five times a day call through a loudspeaker it was very organic to a city nobody minded
[Guest]: it and nobody ever thought that it was impinging in their private or personal space or the
[Guest]: jagarans nobody thought anything about it but now all of these have become irritant
[Guest]: and all of them have become irritants to a degree that people relate their old grievances
[Guest]: linked to this that oh we've been suffering this for years but you did not they did not
[Guest]: suffer this they they did not even notice it it was so much part of your life so this
[Guest]: is what is happening now what you just said that if you don't give your house you don't
[Guest]: get to see another muslim this is also true of muslims see if you're forcing muslims to
[Guest]: live in a ghetto then these muslims they do not see people from another community so you
[Guest]: are driven by your own prejudice but you are in turn also helping another community develop
[Guest]: their own prejudices there are people in the okla or area or batla house area the jamia
[Guest]: area who never encounter a non-muslim at all in their lives they they are born in that
[Guest]: area and they go to the local hospital there where the childbirth happens they go to the
[Guest]: local school there then they go to the college or an institute or whatever there if they
[Guest]: don't if they can afford to go to the university they go to the jamia university or if they
[Guest]: can't afford that then they just get into the workforce uh in that area so their exposure
[Guest]: to anybody outside the community is minimal so while you are trying to insulate yourself
[Guest]: from the outsiders you think they are dirty or they are oppressors or we have suffered
[Guest]: for thousands of years because of them but you are actually imperiling yourself even
[Guest]: further because instead of you trying to understand them and them trying to understand you you
[Guest]: are actually furthering this distance even more so your prejudice is getting reinforced
[Guest]: but the other person's prejudice is also getting reinforced and add to that other person's
[Guest]: prejudice is also genuine grievance for not getting a fair chance a genuine complaint
[Guest]: that the law enforcement agencies the are biased towards them so these are or these
[Guest]: should be matter of concern for any country that you are dispossessing a huge chunk of
[Guest]: your population how can you even imagine that despite this dispossession you can still develop
[Guest]: you can still grow you can your GDP will grow when such a huge chunk of your population
[Guest]: is disaffected it is not part of your mainstream it is not contributing to your mainstream
[Guest]: this human resource is being is uh underemployed it is not being harnessed uh for nation building
[Guest]: how do you even imagine that you can still manage to do well with this in fact if you're
[Amit Varma]: talking of human resources not just a minority community it's all women basically the way
[Amit Varma]: women are like second class citizens in india and can't you know reach their true potential
[Amit Varma]: and you know i had done in a sort of an episode with anchal malhotra a very moving episode
[Amit Varma]: and partition and you know one of the thoughts that came to us while we were in conversation
[Amit Varma]: there was this difference between the abstract and the concrete that when we speak of all
[Amit Varma]: this hatred that is there within people all this animosity towards the other as it were
[Amit Varma]: all of it is in an abstract realm in the concrete realm they can be perfectly good people they
[Amit Varma]: can be friendly they can be assimilative and all of that but in an abstract realm that's
[Amit Varma]: where all these concepts like nationalism and you know hindu purity and that sense of
[Amit Varma]: historical victimhood though they have never been victims themselves all of that comes
[Amit Varma]: into play and therefore it strikes me that what you need really to bring people together
[Amit Varma]: is more of the concrete and less of the abstract and like you pointed out that if you are not
[Amit Varma]: exposed to the other at all if a hindu will have no muslim friends or a muslim will have
[Amit Varma]: no hindu friends then there is none of that concrete where you know you can just look
[Amit Varma]: across the table and you see someone just like you and therefore the abstract concept
[Amit Varma]: doesn't matter so much and and that's kind of a little tragic and if anything it's you
[Amit Varma]: know outside our elite bubbles i think it's only increased you know over the years see
[Guest]: there's another thing here sometimes we are so happy and we know that our abstract is
[Guest]: actually a bubble it's so vulnerable to a hard gaze that we do not even question what
[Guest]: we have inherited the prejudice that we are living with because we know if we look at
[Guest]: it or if we question it it'll all come crashing down because there's no basis to it it's just
[Guest]: probably a insecurity that has been fanned for so long that it has become some sort of
[Guest]: a concretized stone on your heart or in your mind or it's it's probably just economic vulnerability
[Guest]: you just feel so insecure in your own self that you feel that if i share this space with
[Guest]: somebody else probably this opportunity will be taken away from me so that could be one
[Amit Varma]: of the reasons yeah that's a fascinating point i mean in a poor country you know people
[Amit Varma]: tend to think more in zero-sum ways because there is scarcity you know otherwise of course
[Amit Varma]: all human interaction is positive sum you know i buy something from you both of us benefit
[Amit Varma]: that's why we are having that transaction but where there is scarcity where there are
[Amit Varma]: limited opportunities and resources there people tend to think of it as a zero-sum game
[Amit Varma]: if somebody else wins something that means you have lost which you know goes into many
[Amit Varma]: other contexts apart from just money and i guess that is again one factor that could
[Amit Varma]: have be fueling this in a country like india we'll take a quick commercial break now and
[Amit Varma]: when we come back you know we've spoken so far about sort of your personal impressions
[Amit Varma]: and your life and all of that over this period of time but your book is also a fabulous book
[Amit Varma]: of scholarship you know there's so much i learned about the history of islam in india
[Amit Varma]: though i'm fairly well read in history but there were a lot of things which i hadn't
[Amit Varma]: known earlier which i'd really love to get into but let's take a quick commercial break
[Amit Varma]: and after that we shall continue this conversation long before i was a podcaster i was a writer
[Amit Varma]: in fact chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog india uncut
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time i love
[Amit Varma]: the freedom the form gave me and i feel i was shaped by it in many ways i exercise my
[Amit Varma]: writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things because
[Amit Varma]: i wrote about many different things well that phase in my life ended for various reasons
[Amit Varma]: and now it is time to revive it only now i'm doing it through a newsletter i have started
[Amit Varma]: the india uncut newsletter at indiauncut.substack.com where i will write regularly about whatever
[Amit Varma]: catches my fancy i'll write about some of the themes i cover in this podcast and about
[Amit Varma]: much else so please do head on over to indiauncut.substack.com and subscribe it is free once you sign up
[Amit Varma]: each new installment that i write will land up in your email inbox you don't need to go
[Amit Varma]: anywhere so subscribe now for free the india uncut newsletter at indiauncut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: thank you
[Amit Varma]: welcome back to the scene in the unseen i'm chatting with ghazala wahab about a wonderful
[Amit Varma]: and at least for me eye-opening book born a muslim which has so much of both personal
[Amit Varma]: experience and history and sociology about you know islam in india and and does so much
[Amit Varma]: to explain where we are today and why and uh now i want to kind of talk a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about history because you know a lot of i mean history these days has learned a lot
[Amit Varma]: on whatsapp and a lot of people have this view of history that oh you know they think
[Amit Varma]: of how islam came to india and they only think ki chalo conquest who are temple torah all
[Amit Varma]: of that nonsense but it's actually a very multi-layered and heartening story almost
[Amit Varma]: of how islam actually did come to india it wasn't all conquest and destroying temples
[Amit Varma]: so tell me a little bit about you know the origins of islam i mean some versions hold
[Amit Varma]: that you know islam was in india at the time during the prophet's lifetime itself so tell
[Amit Varma]: me a bit about that
[Guest]: there was a communication see communication between the arabs and south indian the malayali
[Guest]: area the kerala region of india so even before arabia became muslims these people were coming
[Guest]: and the trade was really a very prosperous trade when islam came during the prophet's
[Guest]: lifetime also the traders were coming but the religion didn't come in real earnest at
[Guest]: that time because it had not started to expand beyond its territory during the prophet's
[Guest]: lifetime that happened after his death and with the first khalifa which was abu akr so
[Guest]: that is when the muslim armies or soldiers were moving out but in india because the trade
[Guest]: route was already there and these traders were now muslims so when when you're coming
[Guest]: by sea you're actually out of your home for months and sometimes years and sometimes you
[Guest]: don't even know if you're coming back so they obviously would be accompanied by some religious
[Guest]: people who could give them support or succor or somebody who could lead the prayer because
[Guest]: in islam a prayer for men is led by a prayer leader i mean women can pray on their own
[Guest]: but for men which is why the concept of going to a mosque and praying together which is
[Guest]: why mosques have to be huge spaces even if they're not constructed spaces they have to
[Guest]: be huge spaces because men are required to trade together in a congregation led by a
[Guest]: prayer leader so the religious preachers started accompanying these trading caravans a lot
[Guest]: of people settled down there in the preachers was preaching to the local people some converted
[Guest]: some didn't convert but even if you didn't convert if you've just felt some sort of peace
[Guest]: some sort of happiness talking to a person you automatically start veering towards that
[Guest]: person so the early islam which came to india it came through these mendicants who would
[Guest]: set up a small cottage or a place outside the city zones or village or on the outskirts
[Guest]: and people would start coming to them because they found peace there or some sort of comfort
[Guest]: gradually the population in a very organic manner started growing in this entire coastal
[Guest]: belt the malabar belt but it was along the coastline because probably they were also
[Guest]: worried of going too much in the hinterland that happened over the next few centuries
[Guest]: i think by the 9th century they had moved much further inside because there was a lot
[Guest]: of intermarriage was happening then the king there were the paramil kings there they converted
[Guest]: to islam and once the ruler converted to islam then obviously there was this huge umbrella
[Guest]: of royal patronage which was given to the muslim preachers so they moved further inland
[Guest]: and that is when this was the first cycle of islam coming into india at the same time
[Guest]: there was another route sea route which was coming to kutch and this was also traders
[Guest]: businessmen who were coming there working there some settled down there some married
[Guest]: local women the first invader was muhammad bin qasim who came but if you read tarajan's
[Guest]: history of in middle in india he says that he came because there was and by this time
[Guest]: islam had spread to sri lanka also so there were some orphan muslim who were there in
[Guest]: sri lanka the parents had died and there was like a group of orphans and so they wanted
[Guest]: to go back to arabia so this ship was hijacked by the gujarat-based pirates and these kids
[Guest]: were taken away so the caliphate then the governor of basra then he sent a damash to
[Guest]: the king of this region and he said you return the kids and so there was a face-off and then
[Guest]: muhammad bin qasim was tasked to go and rescue the kids so that's how he came leading a army
[Guest]: and that was the first invasion but he came here he defeated the local king dahir he plundered
[Guest]: did whatever and plundering was a very natural part if you're going somewhere you have to
[Guest]: pay for your journey to and back i mean if it doesn't make economic sense to you why
[Guest]: would you go there so they he did some plundering and he returned to arabia so that was the
[Guest]: first invasion that happened but that invasion didn't create a empire or a dynasty or any
[Guest]: such thing he came he went away and this trade continued the in our perception of muslim
[Guest]: invaders we actually do not look at all this with so much of emphasis we look at the invaders
[Guest]: from afghanistan we look at gauri and ghazni because these are the people who left lasting
[Guest]: impact on the indian population the indian society but the lasting impact or even greater
[Guest]: impact was led left by the business community the traders but because that doesn't give
[Guest]: us much room for vilification so that part or the coming of sufis and the how the how
[Guest]: islam spread through sufis that part we kind of whitewash we only focus on the invaders
[Guest]: but invaders was only one part of coming of islam to india and actually invaders were
[Guest]: individuals who were pursuing their political ambitions they were not really ambassadors
[Guest]: of islam they were not coming here to spread islam so subsequently even gauri was trying
[Guest]: to become a muslim you know mujahid and he made the petition to the abbasid caliphate
[Guest]: and said i'm spreading islam but he was far too debauched for the caliphate to consider
[Guest]: him as actually a mujahid i mean he was not really islamic warrior so a lot of warriors
[Guest]: also or a lot of invaders subsequently you know belatedly realized the importance of
[Guest]: claiming the title of being crusaders for islam or mujahids people who are waiting jihad
[Guest]: because they felt that it would accrue them some religious benefits though they were amassing
[Guest]: wealth and they were completely against the principles or the key founding principles
[Guest]: of islam but they thought it would accrue them some benefits but they can carry some
[Guest]: favors with the caliphate so that is how islam came to india the first empire which was set
[Guest]: up here was a slave dynasty which had two prongs one was in bengal which was the bengal
[Guest]: sultanate and the other was established in delhi and north india which was a delhi sultanate
[Guest]: so while the bengal sultanate went further east went up to assam and other parts of the
[Guest]: north eastern states in addition to the whole of bengal the delhi sultanate apart from north
[Guest]: india they and during the reign of alauddin kilji they started moving further south so
[Guest]: the first campaigns in the deccan were carried out by alauddin kilji's commander-in-chief
[Guest]: that i'm forgetting the name kafur whatever his name is malik kafur so interestingly these
[Guest]: were the afghan people of afghan origin but with a lot of persian influences so these
[Guest]: were not arabs the islam which people in kerala and parts of karnataka tamil nadu even the
[Guest]: slight the northern conk and belt the the kind of islam that they were familiar with
[Guest]: or they were practicing was the arabized islam which came to the arab traders but when malik
[Guest]: kafur's campaign succeeded and he conquered these territories so there was this amalgamation
[Guest]: of persianized afghan central asian sort of culture language food and there was this arabized
[Guest]: sort of a thing so if you see this belt there was a confluence of both these influences
[Guest]: which is why the islam practiced in the southern part of india is very distinct from what we
[Guest]: do in north india there's a very clear i mean not only language and culture but even to
[Guest]: some extent in what they believe to be religious practices so there's a difference because
[Amit Varma]: they came from so many different ways all very fascinating and your book is a really
[Amit Varma]: good account of the multiple ways in which you know islam came into india like you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that trade was the predominant way to begin with that you know the muslims who came
[Amit Varma]: to malabar gujarat were really the arabs and whatever happened in the north later the north
[Amit Varma]: was perhaps trade plus some conquest even the conquest there was not so for the purposes
[Amit Varma]: of religious domination it was a lot of it was political you just want to plunder and
[Amit Varma]: in fact the reason that so many temples were destroyed was not because they are hindu temples
[Amit Varma]: or whatever but because they are a symbol of whichever the local ruler is his dignity
[Amit Varma]: or prestige and you want to wipe that out and one of the sort of interesting points
[Amit Varma]: you you quote the historian tara chand from his book influence of islam on indian culture
[Amit Varma]: so i'll just quote you quoting him where he writes quote henceforth muslim influence grew
[Amit Varma]: rapidly they were welcomed as traders and apparently facilities were given to them to
[Amit Varma]: settle and acquire lands and openly practice their religion they must have entered upon
[Amit Varma]: missionary efforts soon after settling down for islam is essentially a missionary religion
[Amit Varma]: and every muslim is a missionary of his faith many were undoubtedly held in respectful esteem
[Amit Varma]: before the ninth century was far advanced they had spread over the whole of the western
[Amit Varma]: coast of india and had created a stir among the hindu populace as much by their peculiar
[Amit Varma]: beliefs in worship as by the zeal with which they professed and advocated them stop quote
[Amit Varma]: and a little later you write something which leads me to my next question where you write
[Amit Varma]: quote their pace of growth was more rapid in the south as compared to the western central
[Amit Varma]: regions primarily because there was great religious social and political turmoil in
[Amit Varma]: southern india during the eighth and ninth centuries there was a tussle for supremacy
[Amit Varma]: between hinduism buddhism and jainism in addition the old kingdoms were in disarray in the face
[Amit Varma]: of new claimants to power into this situation islam appeared upon the scene with a simple
[Amit Varma]: formula of faith well-defined dogmas and rights and democratic theories of social reorganization
[Amit Varma]: it produced a tremendous effect stop quote and my questionnaire is this that you know
[Amit Varma]: when i read this i was sort of thinking about the power of narratives in cultural dominance
[Amit Varma]: and one of the things that struck me here is that people are drawn to simple narratives
[Amit Varma]: complex narratives are too complex as it were they want simple explanations of the world
[Amit Varma]: and it strikes me that islam what it would have provided with its certainties with this
[Amit Varma]: linear strand of what happens where and you don't have a hundred gods and you don't have
[Amit Varma]: all of that would have provided a simple narrative which you can immediately understand and internalize
[Amit Varma]: as opposed to its competitors and i say its competitors because you know there is a school
[Amit Varma]: of thought that hinduism is not some monolithic thing as we know it today that was partly
[Amit Varma]: a construct of you know when the british came their early interlocutors were the apakas
[Amit Varma]: brahmins and the apakas brahmins sold them this version of hinduism as you know the varna
[Amit Varma]: system and the manusmriti hinduism basically and they extrapolated that to the whole subcontinent
[Amit Varma]: but actually there were many many many different traditions within hinduism and they would
[Amit Varma]: all have been very complicated and all of that and islam comes along and one you are
[Amit Varma]: supposed to be zealous about spreading the faith and two you've got a really simple narrative
[Amit Varma]: like one of my and i'm not making a value judgment on simple narratives one way or the
[Amit Varma]: other that they are necessary sometimes they are good sometimes they are misleading like
[Amit Varma]: i once speculated that one of the reasons trump won in 2016 was he had a simple narrative
[Amit Varma]: it was wrong but it was simple and sometimes that's an important thing and perhaps you
[Amit Varma]: could argue the dispensation and power in india has a simple narrative as well it's
[Amit Varma]: wrong but simple you know it doesn't embrace the complexities do you think there's something
[Guest]: to that i agree islam had a very simple narrative added to that simple narrative was a very
[Guest]: laid down structured form of practicing of religion so there were five pillars very easy
[Guest]: to remember one was the kalma which every which just two lines that you memorize it
[Guest]: and the kalma itself is proclamation of your religion that okay i am a muslim now so even
[Guest]: today if a person has to convert to islam all he has to do is recite the kalma and you
[Guest]: are converted there is no ritual happening there is no process of becoming a muslim it's
[Guest]: as simple as reciting of a kalma then you have prayers five times a day again very simple
[Guest]: and the prayer times are fixed what the first prayer is that before dawn then there is just
[Guest]: before the noon hour that is zawal period then you have pre-dusk then you have dusk
[Guest]: and you have night prayer very simple laid down prayer time then similarly ramzan you
[Guest]: have a month in a year where you fast from dawn to dusk very simple no complication and
[Guest]: hajj if you are able-bodied if you're financially solvent you can do it you go for hajj and
[Guest]: the most important is zakat now again zakat is a such a noble thing to do that anybody
[Guest]: would be would really believe and rightly so that a good part of your faith is helping
[Guest]: others so now there's an integral to faith that you have to help others it's not a choice
[Guest]: you're not uh it's not left to an individual's judgment so these were the five pillars now
[Guest]: over the years what has happened you have islamic jurisprudence you have this law that
[Guest]: law all that is later edition but when you're appealing to a non-muslim this is these are
[Guest]: the five pillars very simple systematic way of becoming a muslim and if you see this it's
[Guest]: not even very complicated to practice i mean now hardline muslim ulemas would insist that
[Guest]: you do prayer in a particular way you have to bend in a particular way but traditionally
[Guest]: nobody interrupted in the way you practice your religion the biggest factor in favor
[Guest]: of islam at that point which would have appeared to people who were converting then was lack
[Guest]: of clergy absence of clergy there was no religious leader that you had to go to there was nobody
[Guest]: who would tell you with authority or impose upon you his or her writ that this is how
[Guest]: you have to do it islam sunni islam said it is between you and your allah so you do whatever
[Guest]: you want to do as long as your conscience is clear nobody has any business to interrupt
[Guest]: or tell you that you're doing something wrong so in a society where you had such rigid clergy
[Guest]: it's not just india i mean even uh in the entire christian world where you had such
[Guest]: rigid clergy and when people were expected to be uh referential towards the clergy defer
[Guest]: to their vims and their orders uh spend so much money uh in keeping the clergy happy
[Guest]: so this looked like a very simple and humane sort of a religion where you're also factoring
[Guest]: in looking after a fellow muslim you know there's an islamic saying which is not part
[Guest]: of the quran but it is part of the islamic saying that every muslim is responsible for
[Guest]: uh 40 households in his neighborhood so 10 in each direction so if uh even one person
[Guest]: in this neighborhood of 40 households that every person is responsible to dies of starvation
[Guest]: that sin is upon you how was it that you didn't come to know that somebody was hungry so if
[Guest]: each is responsible for 40 uh so it's it's a cycle it's a circle uh which kind of grows
[Guest]: so with this sort of uh approach and then the sufis very uh selfless poor people who
[Guest]: want nothing for themselves they live in uh poor circumstances they hold these open kitchens
[Guest]: for people to feed people every day all this is very appealing you know as a person you
[Guest]: would just get drawn to something which appears so selfless so the politics of the religion
[Guest]: uh it surfaced much later i mean there was a lot of politics of religion even in arabia
[Guest]: at that time but when you're reaching out to people this politics doesn't show itself
[Guest]: you show yourself uh with your best foot forward and this is what it how it appears to people
[Amit Varma]: yeah and and you know in the popular imagination these days people will look upon uh those
[Amit Varma]: sort of years of you know slave dynasty followed by the mughal dynasty and all of that as mughals
[Amit Varma]: are coming and they've subjugated the local people but that was far from the case uh whoever
[Amit Varma]: might politically have been in charge uh the you know muslims and hindus work together
[Amit Varma]: at all times like shivaji had muslims who worked for him and the mughals had uh hindus
[Amit Varma]: and rajputs and all of that uh uh and all the you know armies were mixed at a very memorable
[Amit Varma]: episode with manu pillay on this which i'll link from the show notes and you know you
[Amit Varma]: sort of uh talk about how this mingling of uh islam and hinduism which led to what you
[Amit Varma]: call quote a distinctively regional syncreticism stop quote was almost inevitable and and i'll
[Amit Varma]: again quote from your book uh quote muslim authority had also to impose itself impose
[Amit Varma]: upon itself other restraints employment of the hindus was a necessity of their rule mehmood
[Amit Varma]: of ghazni had a numerous body of hindu troops who fought for him in central asia and his
[Amit Varma]: hindu commander tilak suppressed the rebellion of his muslim general niyati jin when kutubuddin
[Amit Varma]: abug decided to stay in hindustan he had no other choice but to retain the hindu staff
[Amit Varma]: which was familiar with the civil administration for without it all government including the
[Amit Varma]: collection of revenue would have fallen into utter chaos the muslims who came into india
[Amit Varma]: made it their home they lived surrounded by the hindu people and a state of perennial
[Amit Varma]: hostility with them was impossible mutual intercourse led to mutual uh understanding
[Amit Varma]: uh stop quote and and and obviously you know i've had episodes on akbar as well and the
[Amit Varma]: mughals in general and and you see this syncreticism every day in our culture in our food where
[Amit Varma]: we have influences from everywhere in the clothes that we wear i mean uh prime minister
[Amit Varma]: modi's elegant churidar kurtas are of course you know without the mughals they wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: have been there so all of this is very fascinating and at this time there's another strand that
[Amit Varma]: is emerging that is particularly appealing to even non-religious atheists like me which
[Amit Varma]: is sufism which is so fascinating and and also becomes extremely popular in the subcontinent
[Amit Varma]: almost uh sort of a default way of many people to think about the religion so tell me a little
[Guest]: bit about that strand and how it came up see uh sufi uh the emergence of this uh strand
[Guest]: of sufis or this group of sufis was as old as the religion itself a lot of people tend
[Guest]: to think of sufism as a sect or as islamic sect but actually it was not sufis were just
[Guest]: a group of people who believed in uh following the religion in a particular manner i have
[Guest]: drawn a comparison between the sufi and ulema ulema was a more dogmatic sort of a person
[Guest]: which emerged uh much later with the rise of the caliphate and the earliest caliphate
[Guest]: but uh sufis were there during the prophet's lifetime itself and they used to be the people
[Guest]: who would be constantly lost in prayer and meditation and with no desire of worldly pleasures
[Guest]: so this has evolved concurrent to islam uh in fact in early years there was no distinction
[Guest]: between a regular muslim ulema or a sufi or a maulvi or a sufi because everybody was finding
[Guest]: the religion for themselves and everything was acceptable the early muslim scholars have
[Guest]: actually said that you cannot judge who is following the correct path to islam as long
[Guest]: as your principle of your basics are in order as long as you are devoted uh to the first
[Guest]: karma which is there is no god but allah and muhammad is his prophet so if you are if you
[Guest]: adhere to this basic principle you can find various ways of reaching the almighty so sufism
[Guest]: basically is part of this uh tradition when uh this in south arabia after uh there was
[Guest]: this preponderance of uh sufis and they had established their khankhas and they were challenging
[Guest]: uh the ulemas these hard core so-called islamic elite of learned people who were who had memorized
[Guest]: the quran by heart who were working on islamic laws who were qualifying islamic laws uh that
[Guest]: was the time when they realized that more and more people were drifting to the sufis
[Guest]: because they found the sufis more approachable as opposed to the ulema ulema would be this
[Guest]: learned person and obviously if you think you are learned and you know better a certain
[Guest]: degree of arrogance comes and then this expectation of subservience comes into you so as opposed
[Guest]: to these uh the sufis were very simple people so a lot of people uh would still veer towards
[Guest]: the sufis instead of coming to the ulema for their problems so that was the time when they
[Guest]: started uh vilifying the sufis started telling calling them names saying they're un-islamic
[Guest]: they are actually outside the pale of islam and the vilification started happening so
[Guest]: once they were pushed out of uh saudi arabia not saudi i keep saying saudi arabia arabia
[Guest]: there was no saudi then once they were pushed out so then they moved into territories like
[Guest]: persia they moved into turkey and central asia and india that is how it came in india
[Guest]: and uh at one point i am forgetting i have mentioned it in the book uh there was something
[Guest]: like 10 to 12 various sufi orders uh in various parts of the country in fact one very interesting
[Guest]: sufi order was in kashmir which was uh you know a mix of uh the shahwaites and the muslims
[Guest]: so uh and they worked with both and both uh the hindus and the muslims were devoted to
[Guest]: this sufi order uh but the most popular sufi order in india has been the chishti order
[Guest]: uh which was started by uh munuddin chishti in ajmer and despite the fact that uh muslims
[Guest]: a lot of muslims uh hardliners the conservative ulema vilified them they called them names
[Guest]: and said they are not islamic at all and the whole practice of sufism is against islam
[Guest]: because it encourages idol worship because when you're going to a sufi's mazar your act
[Guest]: it is considered that you are worshiping the mazar which is not correct it's it's uh it's
[Guest]: a wrong uh interpretation of what people do there despite that their popularity has not
[Guest]: waned even today despite the growth of hardliners within islam despite this whole wahhabism
[Guest]: the influence of the sufis has not diminished not just in india but you see even in a country
[Guest]: like pakistan where there has been a really concerted violence against sufis their dargahs
[Guest]: are still so popular which is why they are places of targeted violence because people
[Guest]: still congregate there during wars and they still believe that this is where they'll find
[Guest]: peace this is where they'll their problems will be mitigated so sufi and one of the biggest
[Guest]: factors of spread of islam in india has been the sufis even today if you visit a dargah
[Guest]: though now uh it's there are very few dargahs where you actually get a sense of peace and
[Guest]: calm because there's so much of chaos and so many people there and a lot of non-religious
[Guest]: activities happen there in terms of forcing you to contribute money to this cause that
[Guest]: cause uh to the extent of being extortionist but despite that a lot of non-muslims still
[Guest]: visit the sufis and a lot of non-muslims have such faith in the resident sufis at various
[Guest]: dargahs or people who profess sufism that they treat them like a family advisor they
[Guest]: consult them for family matters so it's not just muslims so i think uh sufism has been
[Guest]: the biggest driver of islam in this region south asian region so there's uh you know
[Amit Varma]: one of my favorite bits in this book is this legend which you uh cite and i'll i'll quote
[Amit Varma]: that entire paragraph and come to a question that i have associated with it uh where you
[Amit Varma]: write quote there is a famous legend associated with the greatest woman sufi ever hazrat rabia
[Amit Varma]: of basra who died in 801 ce once she was found running in the desert with a torch in one
[Amit Varma]: hand and a pitcher of water in another when somebody stopped her to ask what she was doing
[Amit Varma]: she replied that she intended to burn paradise with a torch and douse the flames of hell
[Amit Varma]: with water so that people would love god for the sake of god and not for want of paradise
[Amit Varma]: or fear of hell stop quote and this is so beautiful and what it also sort of seems to
[Amit Varma]: be um almost a subtweet against as it were by current terminology or what it seems to
[Amit Varma]: also um argue against is the transactional nature of religion how conditional the love
[Amit Varma]: of god can be for uh people you know like at the basic level it's of course do this
[Amit Varma]: otherwise you'll go to heaven or otherwise you'll go to hell and do this and you'll go
[Amit Varma]: to heaven and blah blah blah but you know christopher hitchens in one of his um screeds
[Amit Varma]: against organized religion i think this was in the context of christianity but can hold
[Amit Varma]: true for so many others uh wrote about how you know it's basically bribery you you have
[Amit Varma]: a god who's threatening you that if you don't do all of this shit if you don't believe in
[Amit Varma]: me and me only you're in deep trouble and sufism seems to strike away from this and
[Amit Varma]: and you know like i did an episode on nanak panthi with amardeep singh last year at some
[Amit Varma]: point in time and it strikes me that guru nanak was also in his original sayings and
[Amit Varma]: the following he built around him like a sufi in a sense it's the same kind of thing where
[Amit Varma]: you don't need to give it a name but it's like you love god and therefore humanity for
[Amit Varma]: the sake of it but there is there are no rituals involved there's no bribery there's nothing
[Amit Varma]: transactional and the thought that strikes me here is that i see the appeal of something
[Amit Varma]: like this like even to someone who doesn't believe in god like me there's a lot of appeal
[Amit Varma]: of sufism and nanak panthi and you know strands like this the bhakti movement strands like
[Amit Varma]: this which are not dogmatic and which don't have rituals and all that associated with
[Amit Varma]: it but yet at the same time we see that there is you know growing extremism in all the religions
[Amit Varma]: where more and more people seem to be drawn towards those extreme ends towards all these
[Amit Varma]: rules don't do this don't do that and all of that and that in fact you know seems dominant
[Amit Varma]: today though that could just be the availability heuristic and maybe it's just this period
[Amit Varma]: in time and we'll be living in a sufi world 100 years from now but right now that's what
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that people get drawn to these harsh dogmatic othering aspects of religion
[Amit Varma]: rather than to those sort of impulses that sufism seems to attract what are what are
[Guest]: your thoughts on this see there are two ways of approaching the religion any religion one
[Guest]: is fear and another is love so what the sufis were doing they said uh you your religion
[Guest]: should be premised on your love for god what the ulemas or what the dogmatics were doing
[Guest]: that it should be based or it should be premised on fear which is why you hear even among muslims
[Guest]: ki khuda ka khauf karo and khauf karo ka yehi hai ki aap jo bhi kaam kar rahe hain aap
[Guest]: dar ke kar rahe hain the reason why it appears to us and that sufism kind of lost out to
[Guest]: this more extremist form of islam was basically dar khauf is always greater than love i mean
[Guest]: love is such a simple and harmless emotion that it it can never stand up to fear if the
[Guest]: fear of extreme consequences is so huge that you cannot reason out now what has happened
[Guest]: in uh amongst the muslims apart from this fear of god once uh the codification of islamic
[Guest]: laws was happening once the the sayings or habits of the prophet were being written down
[Guest]: as hadith or treaties the documents of his life was being written down in black and white
[Guest]: people started to treat all of this as par uh at par with uh religion itself that these
[Guest]: are the things which are ordained by god and we have to believe into this because eventually
[Guest]: as i said uh politics also gets into religion basically religion in my opinion is a amalgamation
[Guest]: of a number of things it's faith it's culture it's history it's your family traditions it's
[Guest]: your fear it's your superstition and it's politics so uh faith alone cannot make a religion
[Guest]: so islam was probably faith or what uh prophet muhammad was saying was a very simple uh simplistic
[Guest]: faith which i had mentioned earlier uh and which is what appeals to a lot of people but
[Guest]: when the religion of islam was being formed then they took into account all these things
[Guest]: and then political power or political control over people was very very essential which
[Guest]: is why you see the rules the regulations like uh blasphemy came about uh now islam or quran
[Guest]: has absolutely nothing to say about blasphemy i mean you can say whatever you want ideally
[Guest]: you should not i mean it's bad behavior that you are uh calling somebody names but uh it
[Guest]: was not punishable there was if there was no offense in this but when the uh the politics
[Guest]: became part of religion because when the muslim empire was being built uh the first was uh
[Guest]: the the first uh caliphate i'm forgetting the name now uh and the second basit so when
[Guest]: these uh caliphates came and they realized that they are now an empire they have their
[Guest]: armies marching all over the world i mean they're right there at the doorstep of spain
[Guest]: on one side and they're here in central asia on the other so the political power had to
[Guest]: come from only fear i mean you uh have to control the people through fear that then
[Guest]: love cannot work you cannot ask a huge mass of people to follow you because they should
[Guest]: love you so that is how the ulemas the dogmatic ulemas were cultivated encouraged because
[Guest]: they help the political power they help the rulers to uh enforce their writ and the more
[Guest]: rigid you become the more power you feel because then you're you're restricting a individual's
[Guest]: agency over his or her life you keep telling him that this is wrong and you'll rot in hell
[Guest]: this is wrong you'll be burnt in hell so when you are playing on a person's insecurities
[Guest]: to this extent you tend to then look for ways which will guarantee you at least some place
[Guest]: in some corner of paradise so this whole idea of your own agency your whole own individual
[Guest]: approach to religion uh was unacceptable because even one person saying that i do not agree
[Guest]: with you and i will do what i wish to do is disruptive it just disrupts your whole setup
[Guest]: that you have built of power of religious power political power all enmeshed together
[Guest]: so this is something which uh was absolutely unacceptable and progressively as more and
[Guest]: more muslim rulers came they took away the agency of individuals further from them which
[Guest]: is why there was a time when even secular education was frowned upon because they realized
[Guest]: that if you are exposed to education if you are exposed to different ideas you may start
[Guest]: thinking for your own and which is why then the seljuk dynasty came and they said no we've
[Guest]: established this group of madarsas the whole idea was that religious education is enough
[Guest]: when the quran says that education learning is important it means that only islamic learning
[Guest]: religious learning is important you need not learn anything else so the cascading effect
[Guest]: of this has been that a lot of muslims felt that for them learning about islam is enough
[Guest]: to see through this life and they need not learn anything else if you're not exposing
[Guest]: your mind to new ideas if you're not challenging yourself then obviously it leads to some sort
[Guest]: of a intellectual atrophy your capacity to think generation on generation reduces because
[Guest]: you're not using your brain you're not using your uh intellect and this is once you have
[Guest]: these pygmy people uh intellectual pygmies then it is easier to herd them you know like
[Guest]: a flock of cattle you can just tell them go here go there do this and that is where your
[Guest]: whole idea of islamic exclusivism islamic extremism i'm not talking of violence i'm
[Guest]: just talking about extremism in the sense that you feel that you're superior you're
[Guest]: different from others you feel that you have to be even more dogmatic i mean it is not
[Guest]: enough you're praying five times a day now you also need to do extra prayers you also
[Guest]: need to do penance prayer it is not enough that you're doing uh you're fasting 30 days
[Guest]: in a month uh you have to do additional fasting and a lot of muslims actually uh fast through
[Guest]: the year uh every week or every fortnight there's some fast or the other because the
[Guest]: five basic principles are no longer enough they need more and more rigidity in their
[Guest]: faith to feel that they are better and closer to heaven than others yeah all very fascinating
[Amit Varma]: and and you've described this beautifully in your book where you first talk about islam
[Amit Varma]: becoming more and more extreme in kind of a global uh sense and then how that comes
[Amit Varma]: to india like you've written about you know the pushback to this coming from uh ibn tamiyyah
[Amit Varma]: and then from muhammad ibn abdul wahab the whole wahhabi movement and you quoted from
[Amit Varma]: this book called the two faces of islam by stephen schwartz and you write quote uh abdul
[Amit Varma]: wahab said schwartz made no secret of his opinion that all muslims had fallen into unbelief
[Amit Varma]: and that if they did not follow him they should all be killed their wives and daughters violated
[Amit Varma]: and their possessions confiscated shias sufis and other muslims he judged unorthodox were
[Amit Varma]: to be exterminated above all uh wahab and his followers despised music which they viewed
[Amit Varma]: as an incitement to forgetfulness of god and to sin many sufis by contrast use music as
[Amit Varma]: a means to heighten consciousness of god uh stop quote and later you know you have this
[Amit Varma]: section on indian muslim sects like deobandis barelvis uh ala hadith and so on and you talk
[Amit Varma]: about how they all quote owe their theological development to the vast repertoire of shah
[Amit Varma]: waliullah and wahab uh stop quote and it seems to me to be like two sort of parallel strands
[Amit Varma]: which are happening here one is that all of these sects which you describe of course come
[Amit Varma]: from wahhabism and they have this exclusionary view and uh therefore uh you know you will
[Amit Varma]: have the mullahs around having these uh extreme views which kind of feeds into the vicious
[Amit Varma]: circle at the other side it strikes me like the question is often asked that why are indian
[Amit Varma]: muslims not as extreme as muslims in certain other parts of the world who are who are more
[Amit Varma]: radicalized though i would you know continue to stress that muslims are the biggest victims
[Amit Varma]: of terrorism worldwide including what is called islamic terrorism so we should kind of keep
[Amit Varma]: that in mind and not paint with uh too much of a broad brush but yet indian muslims haven't
[Amit Varma]: uh been radicalized to that extreme and it seems to me that one reason for that would
[Amit Varma]: be that a lot of indian islams has sort of you know imbibed the those sufi kind of traditions
[Amit Varma]: and not uh you know the radical kind of islam that comes from these sects that you describe
[Amit Varma]: so tell me a little bit about this uh how through the centuries this tension has played
[Amit Varma]: out between uh the lived islam of many people which takes more from sufism and is like chilled
[Amit Varma]: out and musical and all of that and with the more radical kind the more political kind
[Guest]: see the as i mentioned the radical islam basically was a pushback against this uh growth of sufis
[Guest]: and the influence that sufis were building over the muslim mind okay i'll go a little
[Guest]: back in the history when uh after the death of prophet muhammad the first khalifa was
[Guest]: appointed he came from a very powerful koresh tribe now this koresh tribe was opposed to
[Guest]: the prophet uh when he was propagating islam and these early battles of islam were between
[Guest]: the koresh and prophet muhammad and his followers but when the koresh embraced islam then they
[Guest]: feel they retained their political power which they in any case had earlier also so the first
[Guest]: three khalifas were from the koresh and this only reinforced their power and this is when
[Guest]: the codification of laws started the fourth was uh hazrat ali who was a prophet's uh nephew
[Guest]: and son-in-law so uh he was from his tribe which was not koresh so this political power
[Guest]: when it was vested in this koresh tribe and they were trying to uh and after ali's assassination
[Guest]: it went back to the koresh because uh muhaviyah who assumed uh caliphate after ali's assassination
[Guest]: was also from the same tribe uh so this they were conscious of the fact that they're not
[Guest]: regarded as noble as the earlier caliphs were or uh ali's had ali had a huge reputation
[Guest]: i mean even today all the dargahs and everywhere you go uh it's ali's uh name which is invoked
[Guest]: you know ya ali madad or ali maula you hear sufi music it's uh his name is invoked because
[Guest]: he had such a he had captured the muslim mind in such a huge way that uh the subsequent
[Guest]: uh khalifas they are caliphs they realize that they do not have that spiritual legitimacy
[Guest]: so the office of a caliph was then uh bifurcated the political power vested in the person who
[Guest]: assumed the caliphate and it became hereditary and the uh spiritual power was vested in the
[Guest]: ulema this is something which happened when saudi arabia came about when ibn wahab met
[Guest]: with the ibn saud and they said okay let's divide this country i'll control the religious
[Guest]: part of this i'll control the islamic part of it you control the political part so it
[Guest]: was like a compact so the early evidence of this compact was during the reign of the hereditary
[Guest]: caliphs now caliphs originally were supposed to be elected by the people but once it became
[Guest]: a non-elective it became a hereditary and it became an empire then they felt that there
[Guest]: was a need to have a religious a powerful religious person who would kind of ensure
[Guest]: that the people remain devoted to the uh the ruler the and religion is i mean as we see
[Guest]: in india today also religion is a huge motivator i mean nothing binds people together uh more
[Guest]: strongly than a religious directive from some kind of a religious head so that is how these
[Guest]: ulemas were being cultivated they became a conduit between the people and the ruler and
[Guest]: because they were now on the payroll of the ruler so they were not representing the people
[Guest]: to the ruler they were representing the ruler to the people so their job was to uh tell
[Guest]: the people that what this guy is doing what the ruler or the khalifa is doing is correct
[Guest]: this is islamic and this is islamic uh sanction for this various fatwas were being issued
[Guest]: and the moderates or people who were deemed as somebody who could question them were increasingly
[Guest]: put outside the veil of islam this harassment this uh targeted um pushing them out of the
[Guest]: society or ostracizing them all this started happening around this time so all through
[Guest]: uh and this started within two centuries of prophet's death i mean it was not so bad as
[Guest]: it became in the 15th century onwards after ibn tahmiyyah onwards but this division had
[Guest]: started to come then this was also the time that uh now quran is a book of reference it
[Guest]: has verses it has some prayers it has a lot of things uh it has some some guidance or
[Guest]: some direction to how a person should be leading a honorable life but it doesn't have law so
[Guest]: what we call islamic law is actually not part of the quranic law quran just gives you direction
[Guest]: the only issues which it really addresses with a lot of force is uh divorce marriage
[Guest]: and divorce and usury and all that so there are few things which it addresses uh very
[Guest]: forcefully the other things uh crime punishment all this are suggestions so this was left
[Guest]: to uh i mean the quran didn't say that rules should be made but when the rulers came and
[Guest]: the empires were being built and they felt that they needed a uniform islamic community
[Guest]: like a ummah so the laws were being codified based on what they understood of the quran
[Guest]: so these ulemas who were sitting down and writing islamic laws they started interpreting
[Guest]: the verses and they started laying down the law writing down the law in great details
[Guest]: so this is actually because these were from arabia these are arabs so a lot of their interpretation
[Guest]: stemmed from their own historical uh background what they have their own lived and experienced
[Guest]: their own tribal culture their practices so that kind of crept in uh the laws so what
[Guest]: we see uh in islam they say that if somebody if a person steals you cut off his hand or
[Guest]: uh uh you stone a person so this is not there uh this is not really a divine law this is
[Guest]: a law which has been codified subsequently because this is with the tribal practices
[Guest]: so this these practices obviously have to evolve with times but unfortunately most countries
[Guest]: have their own laws but i'm just using this as an illustration to say so when you're trying
[Guest]: to dominate or rule or govern a huge mass of population you needed very rigid laws so
[Guest]: that the fear of law and fear of god could be instilled in the people so for that sufis
[Guest]: were a liability because they were saying that there's nothing to fear if you've done
[Guest]: no harm no harm will come to you so that is how this whole tradition with you know of
[Guest]: sufism veering away from the classical or dogmatic slum started happening this cleavage
[Guest]: kind of widened and widened why this did not happen so much in india until recently until
[Guest]: the late 80s not it is until recently actually in late 80s the process started uh was because
[Guest]: uh unlike the popular narrative slum did not come to india through uh the clergy or through
[Guest]: the uh rulers it came through largely traders whose interest was very uh small-time business
[Guest]: you know just wanted to live their life and earn a living and be happy or sufis so our
[Guest]: uh slum that we imbibed here and sufis also ensured that a lot of local traditions were
[Guest]: married into their islamic practices which is why in india you find a very not just india
[Guest]: if you go to indonesia also it's a very rooted geographically rooted kind of a religion you
[Guest]: have not completely alienated yourself from your geography from uh the customs traditions
[Guest]: of your ancestors so it's a very nice balanced amalgamation of history faith culture and
[Guest]: what you think today is pragmatism so that is probably one of the reasons why uh indian
[Guest]: muslims had no reason to get radicalized to the extent as you see in certain parts of
[Guest]: the middle east and north africa unfortunately in the 80s when a lot of muslims started going
[Guest]: to the gulf for job and see this is again i'm coming back to the thing my earlier point
[Guest]: that if you are pushing a group of people a large mass of people out of the mainstream
[Guest]: because of your own prejudice then they have to find some ways of surviving so because
[Guest]: of this prejudice was okay not so vocal then but discrimination was still there so a lot
[Guest]: of muslims who were not getting jobs in the mainstream who were not finding employment
[Guest]: at par with their educational levels they started looking for opportunities abroad and
[Guest]: the big opportunities opened with the discovery of oil with the in the middle east and a lot
[Guest]: of muslims started going there so these people when they were exposed to that sort of a religious
[Guest]: practices and in a sharp contrast to their very laid-back amorphous sort of a belief
[Guest]: that you do whatever you do they realized that very clear-cut principles of islam very
[Guest]: clear-cut formula that you must do this you must do that and anything which is made harder
[Guest]: it looks more real i mean unless religion is hard to follow what is the point of following
[Guest]: it so these people when they came back they brought that sort of uh rigidity with them
[Guest]: so that is how you find a lot of uh muslims now not being content with the islam they
[Guest]: have been following and they want to follow a more arabized form of islam and uh but thankfully
[Guest]: even this has not led to radicalization for the simple reason their roots of the local
[Guest]: elements are too strong for them to really veer off track completely so let's again now
[Amit Varma]: go back to uh history before we come to the current day the one sort of the the til the
[Amit Varma]: thing i had absolutely no idea of the one thing i learned from your book was the importance
[Amit Varma]: of 1857 like of course we know the importance of the 1857 rebellion in terms of what it
[Amit Varma]: did for the freedom movement and colonialism in india and all of that but it was also a
[Amit Varma]: big factor sort of the later hindu muslim divides that happened the british played a
[Amit Varma]: role in that 1857 had so much of a wider resonance that i had not known anything about that so
[Amit Varma]: tell me about that why was 1857 so uh important even in uh sort of this uh particular context
[Guest]: see 1857 though a lot of people had risen against the british power they did it under
[Guest]: the mughal emperor now the muslims felt that this will restore the muslim power back in
[Guest]: india if you recall this is it was a period where muslim power or the mughal empire was
[Guest]: actually only notional i mean bahadur shah zafar had no writ outside his own uh fort
[Guest]: the marathas were controlling large tracts i mean even before the british it was already
[Guest]: empire on its last leg so a lot of muslims thought that this would restore the muslim
[Guest]: power now power is associated with glory it's associated with the influence and a lot of
[Guest]: things so they they were fighting the british for that they were fighting the british to
[Guest]: reclaim their lost power lost glory the non-muslims the hindus were fighting to throw the british
[Guest]: out or their own grievances against them because of various policies of usurping territories
[Guest]: like jhansi and other places so they had different motives but once this uh war was given a color
[Guest]: of jihad and which is understandable because jihad religion as i said is a huge motivator
[Guest]: so a clarion call for war uh usually if you have a religious call then more people get
[Guest]: motivated to go do and die type so when this happened a lot of hindus especially the business
[Guest]: community of delhi the rich money lender community uh the traders of delhi which were all hindus
[Guest]: uh they were jari of what was happening and a lot of them had started thinking okay that
[Guest]: is let this bloodletting happen between the muslims and the british and we'll see which
[Guest]: side wins and then we'll take our sides i will reveal our cards then so once this was
[Guest]: happening uh and there was mass killing of muslims reports came out people i mean it's
[Guest]: not difficult to hide that who was telling on them who was the informer who was talking
[Guest]: behind their backs or who was supplying equipment or money to the british so this deepened the
[Guest]: fissure now uh the other thing was the british themselves were because of the history of
[Guest]: uh rebellion in various of colonies from north africa to other parts and the long history
[Guest]: of crusades which have been like really really uh harrowing bloodletting between the muslims
[Guest]: and the christians so they in any case had a very deep prejudice against islam uh if
[Guest]: you recall even today much much before the vilification of islam started in india it
[Guest]: used to happen in the west and even today this whole characterization of islam as a
[Guest]: primitive religion caricaturing of the prophet it happens in the west more than it happens
[Guest]: in india because probably there is some sort of rebellion now that defines that why should
[Guest]: we listen to them if they're offended let them be offended but it also stems from the
[Guest]: fact of their history so a lot of this desire to offend is also a desire to humiliate it
[Guest]: comes from that so in uh that was the time when they started uh cultivating this notion
[Guest]: of muslims as uh uncivilized barbaric people this whole idea or this whole narrative of
[Guest]: victimhood uh was cultivated by them and imbibed by the hindus who suddenly thought who found
[Guest]: themselves uh that muslims are no longer the rulers so the british they kind of became
[Guest]: allies with them against the muslims and they felt that with this we can regain our power
[Guest]: in any case they were better educated because muslims traditionally did not uh imbibe secular
[Guest]: education so their influence on the society was largely through uh music poetry art culture
[Guest]: it was not through education so when the british came and the modern society was being shaped
[Guest]: so muslims were outside the pale and hindus were employed uh in high positions across
[Guest]: the board so uh that further created the fissures and facilitated this narrative a hindu narrative
[Guest]: of victimhood of centuries of victimhood to grow and develop and there was no counter
[Guest]: to this narrative because uh the intellectual capacity of the muslims was so weak uh despite
[Guest]: the fact that the mughal courts had historians they had writers but all that was in the past
[Guest]: by the middle by the early 19th century uh they were actually very badly off intellectually
[Guest]: or financially uh the only thing they had was culture but how far could culture go yeah
[Amit Varma]: no it's like just to kind of sum it up and you can tell me if i'm processing it uh correctly
[Amit Varma]: the 1857 revolt was interesting because number one radical muslims saw it as a chance to
[Amit Varma]: appropriate the struggle and uh sort of go at the forefront you know it was fought under
[Amit Varma]: the banner of the mughal emperor so to say so uh you know muslims came along and and
[Amit Varma]: the british sees this you know this was a great opportunity to divide and rule you've
[Amit Varma]: spoken about how they fanned the narrative of hindu victimhood which again has a colonial
[Amit Varma]: beginning in a sense as far as narratives go or at least a colonial propulsion at this
[Amit Varma]: point and are you right as far as the ordinary muslims are concerned you're right quote the
[Amit Varma]: muslims felt let down by their leaders cheated by their hindu neighbors and disillusioned
[Amit Varma]: by their faith they had believed the ulema who told them that as in the historic battle
[Amit Varma]: of badr allah would intervene to ensure the victory and so as a defeated people tend to
[Amit Varma]: do they became dependent and inward looking and then you write about how quote the ulema
[Amit Varma]: were quick to turn this to their advantage they claimed that while the muslims cause
[Amit Varma]: was just their faith was weak hence the faith needed to be strengthened stop quote and you
[Amit Varma]: write about how all these sort of uh sects inspired these sunni muslim sects inspired
[Amit Varma]: by wahhabism like the devbandis and barelvis were a consequence of you know grew in power
[Amit Varma]: at this point and you write as a result ordinary muslims started shrinking away from the national
[Amit Varma]: mainstream increasingly identifying with the idea of the global ummah besides his development
[Amit Varma]: one of the effects of the 1857 revolt was the erosion of the economic and educational
[Amit Varma]: foundations of the muslims stop quote and this of course has a cascading effect you
[Amit Varma]: know one of the prominent muslim leaders we remember in our history from that period is
[Amit Varma]: of course saeed ahmad khan who started the oligarh muslim university later and all of
[Amit Varma]: that but you point out that how he was almost a minority figure within his community in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that you know people just turned away from that kind of secular education they
[Amit Varma]: turned away from modernity and that is a sort of a trend that has continued ever since in
[Amit Varma]: india tell me a little bit more about that and also my other sort of related question
[Amit Varma]: is that what then seems to happen at this point or what at least comes into stark relief
[Amit Varma]: at this point is the dual notion of the ummah on one hand and the nation on the one hand
[Amit Varma]: where you can ask you know where does a muslim belong if i am a muslim am i an indian or
[Amit Varma]: do i belong to the larger muslim ummah and am i looking to sort of the caliphate for
[Amit Varma]: my source of identity so this is also a tension that's sort of playing out in all of these
[Amit Varma]: years and has a consequence on our politics as well so tell me a little bit about these
[Amit Varma]: different kinds of tensions one muslims turning away from the mainstream almost sort of in
[Amit Varma]: an intellectual sense ghettoizing themselves as it were and and then these growing conflicts
[Guest]: between ummah and nation i'll answer the second one first see this is a misconcept and again
[Guest]: a part of the vilification which started with the british in and around the 1857 revolt
[Guest]: that muslims there is a ummah they are not subservient to the regime they are not they
[Guest]: don't consider themselves citizens of a particular nation where they live their their loyalty
[Guest]: always lies with the central figurehead of the caliph now the thing is that if you see
[Guest]: in india even through the various muslim dynasties starting with the delhi sultanate there was
[Guest]: no connection with the caliph so much so that during the reign of akbar he actually challenged
[Guest]: a caliph in the sense that he said he was deserving of being a caliph so and india was
[Guest]: never a islamic country despite this long history of a muslim rule preceding the mughals
[Guest]: also it was never declared a islamic country that was one of the factors that it was always
[Guest]: out of the pale of the larger muslim ummah because it was considered a country where
[Guest]: majority is still not muslim so it did not qualify as a islamic country so the muslims
[Guest]: in india have always been rooted in in this country uh which is another reason that though
[Guest]: muslims go out for employment uh you do not see muslims settling down in a lot of foreign
[Guest]: countries the majority of guys who go to the middle east for employment they work there
[Guest]: they earn their living there send remittances back home and once the job is over they come
[Guest]: back here you don't see that muslims are going in containers and somehow getting into canada
[Guest]: or get getting into some place because just they feel that they can have a better life
[Guest]: there uh even when partition happened and they were promised a muslim uh country islamic
[Guest]: country majority did not go the rich went primarily because they thought they will work
[Guest]: far there uh as opposed to india or as opposed to hindu india but the middle the lower middle
[Guest]: class the poor they did not go because they have been so rooted to the land i'll give
[Guest]: you the example of my own family we have been the most immobile family in my family nobody
[Guest]: has moved anywhere in life uh physically uh we uh i grew up in agra the maximum i went
[Guest]: out was uh come to delhi and live in this area my entire family we are all in and around
[Guest]: agra for generations we have lived here so our this fondness of staying in a place and
[Guest]: identifying that with that place identifying with that the culture of that place the food
[Guest]: of that place i mean i still hanker for street food in agra people say the best street food
[Guest]: is in banaras or lucknow but i keep saying no no agra is the best and i know which hawker
[Guest]: sells the best stuff so uh this rootedness uh has in in india has ensured that there
[Guest]: is no concept of umma no muslim looks up to anybody in any case there is no global muslim
[Guest]: leadership anywhere so what is that muslim looking at or looking for you don't find any
[Guest]: indian muslim forget going to palestine or forget going to afghanistan to fight uh nobody
[Guest]: even raises a voice for kashmiris i mean kashmir is a part of india and kashmir has been suffering
[Guest]: this roiling insurgency since 1989 and so many atrocities so much of violence has happened
[Guest]: against the muslims in kashmir but uh you don't find mainstream muslim in any other
[Guest]: part of india uh emphasizing with them or raising their voice in their favor so this
[Guest]: muslim brotherhood is actually a concept which has been fanned by uh vested interests from
[Guest]: time to time to just uh question their loyalty to the country of uh residents of the country
[Guest]: uh their nation because it also helps you build a narrative of that they cannot be trusted
[Guest]: that their fifth columnist their loyalty doesn't lie here as gold barker had said that
[Guest]: so it it fans that it fuels this narrative which is why everybody from time to time talks
[Guest]: of the muslim umma there is no muslim umma i mean each muslim from different countries
[Guest]: are very distinct from another uh muslim uh uh japanese not japanese extreme example but
[Guest]: a european muslim who's uh not a migrant who's not gone from north africa who's a european
[Guest]: because he uh was converted while being uh in europe is very different from a sri lankan
[Guest]: muslim or a bengali muslim similarly a bengali is very very different from a tamil muslim
[Guest]: so they wherever they are uh they are extremely rooted in uh their geography in their history
[Guest]: and in the traditions of that particular place even in terms of costume uh muslims from bengal
[Guest]: would be wearing a sari in a particular fashion and muslims in tamil nadu would be wearing
[Guest]: in a particular fashion but a punjabi muslim will not be wearing a sari like a punjabi
[Guest]: hindu wouldn't wear a sari so this is a second part i'll come to the i'll respond to this
[Amit Varma]: quickly where i completely agree with you as far as uh you know about uh uh muslims
[Amit Varma]: here or in fact anywhere else for that matter being rooted in their local circumstances
[Amit Varma]: and all that i completely buy that which is why it uh you know savarkar was playing such
[Amit Varma]: a devious game in his toxic book hindutva where he spoke about how the only indians
[Amit Varma]: are those whose motherland whose place of origin and place of worship is india and he
[Amit Varma]: said muslims aren't because they owe their allegiance to mecca which was not true at
[Amit Varma]: all at a social level but nevertheless there was a political strand and i'm you know specifying
[Amit Varma]: political as opposed to social or cultural there was a political strand which did look
[Amit Varma]: to the caliphate for example uh and it's very consequential to how our history turned out
[Amit Varma]: and i'm referring of course to the khilafat movement of the ali brothers where after world
[Amit Varma]: war one was over they demanded you know the khilafat movement demanded a sort of reinstatement
[Amit Varma]: of the caliphate as it were and that became consequential for us because mahatma gandhi
[Amit Varma]: who at that time hadn't really become the leader of the congress so to say tied up with
[Amit Varma]: them as uh you know as a tactical means uh and became the leader of the congress which
[Amit Varma]: caused jinnah who until that point was a great moderate leader in the congress to walk out
[Amit Varma]: in disgust and say what the hell is this because it was of course incoherent because gandhi
[Amit Varma]: is talking about the nation and the ali brothers are talking about the umma and the and eventually
[Amit Varma]: of course that alliance fell apart but proved to be really consequential and i totally agree
[Amit Varma]: with you from my limited experience and readings of course that um you know most muslims are
[Amit Varma]: just rooted in their circumstances but nevertheless what is happening in modern times and this
[Amit Varma]: is something that you describe later is that you have these saudi petrodollars coming into
[Amit Varma]: india where uh you know they are setting up these organizations all over the place and
[Amit Varma]: they are doing what like at one point in the context of asam you write a quote today the
[Amit Varma]: traditional mikhla chador of asam is being replaced by so-called islamic dresses like
[Amit Varma]: salwar suits or shararas complete with the hijab stop quote so at a political level there
[Amit Varma]: is an effort to uh sort of go beyond uh the local specific sort of you know leave the
[Amit Varma]: mikhla chador aside and put on the hijab so you know does this worry you is this increasing
[Amit Varma]: is it part of the vicious circle of extremism that's kind of uh going on there are two things
[Guest]: here actually you have asked two questions the first is the khilafat now see this whole
[Guest]: khilafat movement uh this is exactly why i have written that muslim politician is absolutely
[Guest]: irrelevant because he doesn't represent his own people so at the during the freedom struggle
[Guest]: when everybody was veering towards fighting the british there was a group of uh people
[Guest]: which ali brother johar uh muhammad ali johar and his brother their priority was amorphous
[Guest]: concept i mean even the turks didn't want the caliphate to survive i mean they they
[Guest]: were tired of it but because these ulemas i mean not ulema they were not ulemas but
[Guest]: they they came from a strand of religion which was driven by ulemas uh i don't know if you
[Guest]: read uh maulana azad's india wins freedom he describes uh this meeting with gandhi and
[Guest]: uh where this maulana basri and all these people are there and uh ali brothers are there
[Guest]: and they said our priority is that the caliphate should be restored and people like him and
[Guest]: people azad and maulana azad and rafi ahmed kids by and they were perplexed they said
[Guest]: but that is not our agenda our agenda is something else so even at that point these people these
[Guest]: group of people they their uh worldview or their concept of what muslims should stand
[Guest]: for or what muslim politics should stand for was very different from what people wanted
[Guest]: which is why in the early years muslim league had no support uh they had no ground support
[Guest]: it was only a party of leaders and party of petitioners they didn't have ground workers
[Guest]: the ground workers came only when jamaat islami aligned itself with uh muslim league that
[Guest]: is when they got that street bar and they could carry out their violence and uh other
[Guest]: things but as long as uh it was strong of jamaat islami they had nothing they had nothing
[Guest]: to stand on which is why even jinnah when he came and he drifted into muslim league
[Guest]: muslim league had no base in india that base was built only once jamaat islami kadar came
[Guest]: and jamaat islami kadar was in any case hugely uh dogmatic because of madhudi's uh philosophies
[Guest]: in fact madhudi's influence went well beyond india even muslim brotherhood uh they uh drew
[Guest]: inspiration from madhudi's writing he's supposedly the first person who has given some kind of
[Guest]: a concrete shape to the concept of political islam so all this happened later uh now coming
[Guest]: to the second part of your question which is that uh in assam what is happening the
[Guest]: petrodollars this is what i refer to as arabization of indian islam this is again it's not radicalization
[Guest]: it is actually in real sense arabization because the earliest islamists also they felt that
[Guest]: because islam came to arabia so arabs were the chosen people though prophet in his last
[Guest]: sermon has said that arab is not superior to anybody else and all people are equal but
[Guest]: arabs have always maintained their superiority even in the present-day politics their biggest
[Guest]: rivalry has been with iran only not because asia sunni is one part of it the other part
[Guest]: is this traditional uh rivalry that historical cultural rivalry because persia was a very
[Guest]: evolved uh nation well even before islam came well before islam came whereas arabia was
[Guest]: a primitive group of tribes so they really did not have a society as sophisticated as
[Guest]: learned as persia had uh iran had so this rivalry uh is comes from there so when uh
[Guest]: they realized that in the indian subcontinent or a lot of the central asia the persian version
[Guest]: of islam despite being sunnis uh their mannerism their language their literature this is becoming
[Guest]: popular in fact that persian language was part of our indian uh language the court language
[Guest]: well after freedom also independence also so when they this obviously was a huge inferiority
[Guest]: for the arab society or arab politicians because they were feeling themselves thinking we are
[Guest]: the chosen ones we should be predominant but because they had nothing to speak of no economy
[Guest]: until the oil uh was found uh they couldn't do much about it so once they had the resources
[Guest]: they started this export of their version of islam in great earnest and it spread rapidly
[Guest]: but see in india despite this it did not come in a very violent fashion as it happened uh
[Guest]: in parts of pakistan and afghanistan fortunately because again there is no umma it's just a
[Guest]: very rooted geographically limited or located religion that people are imbibing arab practices
[Guest]: they are trying to find a arabized version of their practice of islam whether it's in
[Guest]: language and dress and saying allah hafiz or in saying ramadan and salat instead of
[Guest]: rosa and namaz and so they're doing all this but it is limited as of now it is limited
[Guest]: to only that it is not really translating into extremism or radicalism and uh i'm just
[Guest]: leading you on uh that is also the reason that despite this whole idea of terrorism
[Guest]: uh islamic terrorism in india and our government keeps saying that terrorism is the biggest
[Guest]: threat to humanity i do not believe that we have terrorism is a problem in india i do
[Guest]: not believe that our threat is terrorism i think it's complete propaganda yeah i mean
[Amit Varma]: i agree with you it's just a no-brainer that you know we don't have that kind of terrorism
[Amit Varma]: here if it's if anything it is it comes in from outside let me take you back to the other
[Amit Varma]: question though which you know in on this show there are a lot of digressions because
[Amit Varma]: we discuss so many things that we just jump from one to the other but the other you know
[Amit Varma]: i'd ask two questions and the other one was this then tendency to look inward to become
[Amit Varma]: you know after 1857 the ulemas get more extreme and they get more of a hold and you speak
[Amit Varma]: about how muslim society then turn inwards it is distrustful of secular education it
[Amit Varma]: buys a rhetoric that all you need to know to you know prosper in the afterlife or whatever
[Amit Varma]: is knowledge of islam and the quran and all of that and that becomes um and in a sense
[Amit Varma]: a modern uh sort of illustration of that is that incident you describe from your own life
[Amit Varma]: where at the age of 16 while you are writing essays to get into universities abroad one
[Amit Varma]: of your cousins is being felicitated for memorizing the quran so tell me a little bit about this
[Amit Varma]: sort of drift and how it kind of harmed the muslim community here and i suppose it is
[Amit Varma]: possibly related in some way and maybe you can expand on that but what you said earlier
[Amit Varma]: also about muslim political leaders not really representing the people at large per se so
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about you know these two strands and the kind of marginalization
[Guest]: that is resulted in see the ulemas in india have always been very conservative very dogmatic
[Guest]: so it's not that they suddenly became extreme because uh the source of their islamic learning
[Guest]: came from largely from shah waliullah who was exposed to this sort of islam when he
[Guest]: went for hajj to arabia and he was though there's no evidence that he met up with abdul
[Guest]: wahab but he was familiar with his works his writing so when he came to india he thought
[Guest]: he sought to reform indian islam which he thought was had fallen on bad days because
[Guest]: people were had adopted so many customs and cultures of the local people so when the indian
[Guest]: ulema class developed it grew out of he he ran the very successful and very prestigious
[Guest]: madarsa in delhi that madarsa rahimia so when this learned class of indian ulema came mostly
[Guest]: emerged from madarsa rahimia so they were always like that what happened after 1857
[Guest]: when your financial power was taken away when you were economically degraded with so much
[Guest]: of loss of life and hope of future was looked very bleak so like all disillusioned all weak
[Guest]: all disheartened people they try and turn to religion and they try to turn more and
[Guest]: more to dogmatic and religion because it's not only comforting it's it kind of takes
[Guest]: away your your attention away from your present misery because it just promises you great
[Guest]: things which will happen to you in the future so this is uh what was happening to the muslims
[Guest]: because there was so much in uh this area i mean the widespread bloodshed that happened
[Guest]: after 1857 i mean if you read the old account it's in the north india there were villages
[Guest]: which were wiped out so people at that point they had no uh way of uh you know finding
[Guest]: some kind of support who could they turn to the emperor was no longer there they were
[Guest]: uh rudderless they were leaderless so at that point the ulema smoothly moved into this space
[Guest]: and muslims in any case had a historic tradition of looking up to a religious figurehead as
[Guest]: um as a ruler because you have a history of caliphate where uh the early three uh four
[Guest]: caliphs were also they were both spiritual as well as temporal leaders so for them to
[Guest]: accord the leadership status to a ulema or to a group of ulemas was not very difficult
[Guest]: they just thought maybe uh this is how we'll uh reclaim our lost uh glory power or whatever
[Guest]: so that that is when the ulemas started wielding a disproportionate influence over the uh population
[Guest]: syed ahmad khan uh was part of this delhi elite and his family had witnessed the wholesale
[Guest]: massacre but because his family was aligned with the british they were in the service
[Guest]: of the british so they didn't suffer the repercussions and he used his association his family's association
[Guest]: to get concessions from them to try start up a school for muslims that is how anglo-arabic
[Guest]: school then metamorphosed into the university illegal muslim university british also facilitated
[Guest]: his visit to oxford and cambridge so he could see uh what how a modern university is designed
[Guest]: and how it operates but uh because a large number of muslims were now closely aligned
[Guest]: with the ulema uh because first mover advantage ulemas had moved first so they managed to
[Guest]: get a bigger support they did not want to join the university because there was a constant
[Guest]: tussle between the ulema and sir syed there were a lot of fatwas which are issued against
[Guest]: sir syed uh saying that he's promoting un-islamic practices he's promoting kufr or even sin amongst
[Guest]: the muslims so he he was trying to convince a rich landed muslim gentry the landlords
[Guest]: uh the taluk dars that you send your kids to the sons no daughters uh to my institution
[Guest]: he was trying to convince the ulema that look i will ensure that they get islamic education
[Guest]: which is why the whole curriculum of aligarh uh university was uh modern but islamic at
[Guest]: core so their prayer they did ensure that there were prayers happening they did ensure
[Guest]: that some sort of islamic dress became a uniform there that sherwani aligari pajama and all
[Guest]: of that so he maintained he ensured that the cultural ethos of uh north indian upper uh
[Guest]: caste and class muslim is in place and a modern education is also there which is why this
[Guest]: very modern elite muslim elite emerged from the early years of aligarh university which
[Guest]: eventually moved to pakistan so that was uh his contribution but then one aligarh university
[Guest]: is not enough i mean even today they cater to some uh 4 000 students i mean it's it's
[Guest]: a drop in the ocean and at that time it was much smaller but uh it was not only that even
[Guest]: uh sayyid ahmad khan's focus in those days was on educating the elite he was not uh in
[Guest]: the favor of expanding this uh doors of learning or opening these doors of learning to um lower
[Guest]: class or lower caste or poor muslims as well as women he felt that women cannot be better
[Guest]: or more educated than men because it will disrupt the family harmony so as long as they
[Guest]: are quran literate and they are good enough to teach their kids uh the quran so it's fine
[Guest]: so this conflict between so-called modernity and uh conservatism uh continued till uh for
[Guest]: many years till uh leading up till the partition because if you see this early muslim leaders
[Guest]: were all from this aligarh stock which is why muslim league earlier was called the aligarh
[Guest]: party because it produced these early class of sophisticated muslims articulate learned
[Guest]: people with fancy libraries and studies at home who would be you know who'd be so rich
[Guest]: that they needn't work they would just dwell on poetry and literature and classical music
[Guest]: so there was another reason why uh the influence of ulemas did not weigh even after uh independence
[Guest]: because when the pushback from the lower classes and the lower castes of the muslims they it
[Guest]: started i mean this upward mobility started after the partition uh these were the people
[Guest]: who again the ulemas target and these are the people because of poverty are the first
[Guest]: ones to go to a madrassa because at least that ensures some amount of education to the
[Guest]: child so the the influence of the ulema has remained strong over uh the community until
[Guest]: and unless people who have really been disruptors who have moved away uh forged their own paths
[Guest]: and their own education whether in a muslim institution or a non-muslim institution and
[Guest]: they have been bold enough to question the ulemas and there has been a substantive number
[Guest]: of muslims who have done this uh since um the independence movement maulana azad was
[Guest]: one of them he he was completely removed from this traditional ulema led or aligarh led
[Guest]: community of muslims so there have been people like that and probably even today there's
[Guest]: a kind of a balance there's equal number on both sides unfortunately the the moderate
[Guest]: is usually uh silent because uh for various fears i mean he is viewed as a renegade muslim
[Guest]: by the conservative ones you know like an apologist and he's viewed only as a muslim
[Guest]: even by a non-muslim by a non-muslim they don't really see that okay so this person
[Guest]: or this uh muslim is not a conservative fundamentalist dogmatic muslim they don't see they when when
[Guest]: they are targeting you or when they want to vilify you you're only a muslim so this this
[Guest]: class uh by and large remains invisible and silent because you don't want to draw attention
[Guest]: to themselves which is why when we are talking of a muslim society you keep thinking about
[Guest]: very rigid conservative people who are driven in largely by the ulema which is true a group
[Guest]: a substantive part of the society is like that but there's also the other group which
[Guest]: is not like that which is individualistic which has uh which has uh aspirations or dreams
[Guest]: or desires like anybody else who do not really identify themselves with the community per
[Guest]: se but with their own socio-economic milieu where a middle-class muslim they see themselves
[Guest]: as a middle class and like any other middle class they're they're struggling to go on
[Guest]: an annual holiday they're struggling for a next promotion and job they're trying to get
[Guest]: a scholarship so this class is also there and they they are convinced and more and more
[Guest]: for in the last few uh years since probably the last decade they're getting it more and
[Guest]: more convinced that the more they hide themselves better they will be able to go ahead in life
[Guest]: i mean it's not just a question of survival it's also a question of leading a decent existence
[Amit Varma]: no that's that's really tragic and resonant and you mentioned that it's become worse during
[Amit Varma]: the last 10 years and and there are multiple reasons for that one of course is the rise
[Amit Varma]: of the bjp which we'll talk about and uh you know how virulent everything has become but
[Amit Varma]: as far as moderation is concerned like when you were telling me about the moderate muslim
[Amit Varma]: yeah of course the radicals will think he's not muslim enough but then for the others
[Amit Varma]: there is you know a moderate muslim can never do enough to convince him that he is not like
[Amit Varma]: the radicals and that is in fact a tendency that i see in other domains also it's not
[Amit Varma]: just about islam it's saying the domains of politics where for example the word centrist
[Amit Varma]: has become a pejorative on twitter where people will call shekhar gupta a centrist as if you
[Amit Varma]: know it is a pejorative and something really bad because what you have is uh you have these
[Amit Varma]: echo ideological echo chambers on social media and they have their purity tests and it's
[Amit Varma]: a race to extremism as you know within those echo chambers people will keep signaling their
[Amit Varma]: virtue to get higher and higher and one way of doing that is by castigating those who
[Amit Varma]: are not pure enough so if you don't belong to those echo chambers like i i suspect the
[Amit Varma]: vast silent majority uh then you might as well just stay silent um you know why invite
[Amit Varma]: that mob upon yourself and i guess that's true in the context of anything that you know
[Amit Varma]: i think social media also has exacerbated this drift towards the extremes now one of
[Amit Varma]: the sort of parts of your book which i was struck by and also saddened by is when you
[Amit Varma]: talk about this um you know person who does odd jobs and his name is g arun and uh which
[Amit Varma]: is an odd name but one day you discover that his actual name is uh muhammad zia ul haq
[Amit Varma]: which he tells you and you know two other people are sonu and bablu and one of them
[Amit Varma]: one day tells you you know in confidence that hum bhi musliman hai and this is really sad
[Amit Varma]: because it's almost as if they have to hide their identity from the others around them
[Amit Varma]: so that there are no consequences just as a matter of precaution again going back to
[Amit Varma]: annie's quote about you know home is not just where you are safe but where you are visible
[Amit Varma]: and these are not people who feel comfortable enough to be visible and they go to the extent
[Amit Varma]: of you know hiding their names and calling themselves sonu and bablu now you've referred
[Amit Varma]: to sort of five historical reasons why there is this sort of distrust still has grown between
[Amit Varma]: hindus and muslims and why you know they are in this state i'll quickly skip through them
[Amit Varma]: and then ask you to elaborate yeah one there is partition where nearly eight million muslims
[Amit Varma]: cross over to pakistan and a sizable proportion of these are the elites it's almost as if
[Amit Varma]: all the elites who can afford to go just go and what you have left behind is the slightly
[Amit Varma]: lower classes and so that there it has a devastating impact then the bloodletting that happened
[Amit Varma]: during partition leads to distrust so uh you know starting with siddharth patel who doesn't
[Amit Varma]: want any muslims in the uh you know in the levers of government so muslims are filtered
[Amit Varma]: out of the army and the bureaucracies and you quote najib jung at one point uh saying
[Amit Varma]: even about the modern times that quote muslims on a selection panel may be hesitant to push
[Amit Varma]: for a muslim candidate for fear of appearing parochial or communal stop quote and and then
[Amit Varma]: this leads to the other factor that a lot of muslims feel hey we won't even get a fair
[Amit Varma]: deal so you call it the reluctance to even try and they don't even sort of make the effort
[Amit Varma]: you again quote wajahat habibullah saying quote there are two issues here actual exclusion
[Amit Varma]: of the muslims and the feeling of exclusion from the national uh mainstream stop quote
[Amit Varma]: and and of course they haven't then got um you know because of this day in secular education
[Amit Varma]: they're not even educated enough they uh you know and and so they have uh less opportunities
[Amit Varma]: of getting ahead of course some of them go to the gulf and all that but you speak about
[Amit Varma]: the consequences of that the exposure to wahhabi islam uh you know the remittances which disturb
[Amit Varma]: the social balance as you put it and finally you talk about how we are now in an equilibrium
[Amit Varma]: where there is tremendous insecurity among muslims in india so uh and of course there's
[Amit Varma]: also the sort of uh the political influence of uh what uh happened when the bjp kind of
[Amit Varma]: um came to power and all of that which you know pushed uh the muslims to further um extremes
[Amit Varma]: so tell me a little bit about all of this that you know the way these factors kind of
[Amit Varma]: pile up it almost seems like you know it was always going to be this way i mean um which
[Amit Varma]: is very kind of so what's what's your sense of where uh muslims are today like where is
[Amit Varma]: this going is there a is there a direction in which this is going that makes you despair
[Amit Varma]: i hear affluent people of all religions actually but also muslims saying that we want to leave
[Amit Varma]: the country i know people who've already left because of the way uh things are going so
[Amit Varma]: what is your sense of where things stand today like we are in 2021 for god's sake you would
[Amit Varma]: have thought we've you know we've been globalizing through this period uh we've been exposed
[Amit Varma]: to the whole world all of that are we going backwards what's going on i think let's look
[Guest]: at it from a different way today uh i have quoted the figures in another chapter i think
[Guest]: marginalization of indian muslims the rss outreach through educational institutions
[Guest]: and professional uh coaching institutions is phenomenal they are uh churning out 20
[Guest]: lakh nearly 20 lakh students uh from their various bharti schools all over the country
[Guest]: every year now if this has been going on since the 50s these schools you can imagine the
[Guest]: mass that they have uh created the then see the other side yeah in the same way they have
[Guest]: uh our uh bureaucracy our civil services the kind of people who are uh joining the bureaucracy
[Guest]: are mostly from small towns mostly from quasi villages or you know villages on the verge
[Guest]: of being towns a lot of these uh people uh they have schooled at some point of their
[Guest]: life in a rss run school or when they do this pre-is coaching or pre-army uh the ssc coaching
[Guest]: when they try and do that they do it in a rss run school which institution a coaching
[Guest]: center so this outreach is so huge and this kind of deliberately misleading version of
[Guest]: your history which is being taught to them uh it becomes truth i mean why will you question
[Guest]: it why will you think that you have been taught something which is completely false or which
[Guest]: is not correct or which is exaggerated uh because if you've learned this uh it's part
[Guest]: of your uh mental makeup now a lot of people think that history is nonsense history is
[Guest]: it's of no use i mean you do sciences you do math you do computer sciences but the truth
[Guest]: is at some point in your life you have studied a faulty history and that never leaves you
[Guest]: that impression never leaves you take for instance partition we hear stories about atrocities
[Guest]: that hindus and sikhs have suffered in partition we we have this uh this collection of stories
[Guest]: from people people who have suffered they have and they have passed it on to the next
[Guest]: generation to the children to the grandchildren they talk about it but the similar stories
[Guest]: are also being collected in pakistan i mean it's not that there was no massacre of muslims
[Guest]: i mean there was massacre of muslims also but when we recall partition or when we talk
[Guest]: of partition and how how badly we have suffered we do not take into account that they have
[Guest]: suffered equally so it's a collective suffering on both sides but in our narration it's one-sided
[Guest]: then this narration goes further on then you talk about uh you bring in the ummah you bring
[Guest]: in the islamic terrorism you bring in uh appeasement of muslim you bring in so many various factors
[Guest]: to create an image of a community which has wronged us wronged the hindus they have their
[Guest]: loyalty to india has always been suspect they have been fifth columnist they are the ones
[Guest]: who get the best of the government policies i mean you you see even today people actually
[Guest]: genuinely believe that muslims get the best of government policies the the policies favor
[Guest]: the muslims which is not correct so when you have these kind of narratives coming from
[Guest]: so many different sources why won't you believe that these are correct it's very difficult
[Guest]: to sift through them and to tell people that look this is not true this is the other side
[Guest]: you listen to the other side so when we talk of muslims becoming uh you know getting pushed
[Guest]: out the muslims not trying enough in india muslims getting disillusioned or muslims being
[Guest]: marginalized or muslims getting you know towards some kind of radical islam all all of this
[Guest]: is a consequence of uh the realization this is academic uh information for a lot of people
[Guest]: but for muslims this is something which they have grown up with uh in a small towns maybe
[Guest]: it was much less when i was growing up i didn't see this in my face but uh in delhi when i
[Guest]: came a big city which is supposed to be more modern which is supposed to be more liberal
[Guest]: than agra which is like back or beyond i mean not really but in a manner of manner of speaking
[Guest]: so when in a big town where people with a greater exposure have this sort of a perception
[Guest]: of muslims where there is no curiosity of finding out about them uh it would automatically
[Guest]: put you in a kind some kind of a reductive shell you you feel that maybe i'm not welcome
[Guest]: or if i'm welcome then i'm being suspected all the time or you start doubting your own
[Guest]: relationships with these people uh that uh whether they really are my friends or they're
[Guest]: not or whether they're talking about me behind my back uh whether they gossip about me or
[Guest]: whether they make fun of me the way i behave the way i dress or whatever or my my educational
[Guest]: background so there are so many things which now then become part of this mindset which
[Guest]: we are uh which we have kind of uh seen happening uh not just in the last 10 years but for many
[Guest]: many years but now it is in our face because it has been growing so when we talk about
[Guest]: what is the future i i feel that it is so difficult to actually penetrate this uh disinformation
[Guest]: uh it's not even a campaign now it's like a wall of disinformation which has um uh which
[Guest]: has been built all around us so it is so difficult to penetrate that but unless you penetrate
[Guest]: this how do you tell them to see the right from wrong so the fate of muslims is not their
[Guest]: fate alone i mean their fate is so intrinsically linked to the fate of how we go forward how
[Guest]: as a nation we go forward are we going to be a modern progressive forward-looking country
[Guest]: or are we going to be a country which is always thinking of historic wrongs which need to
[Guest]: be righted now so which is why even when i was writing this book i was not thinking in
[Guest]: terms of addressing only muslims my idea was that i need to make some kind of an effort
[Guest]: that i'm reaching out to people and telling them that if you just have an open mind and
[Guest]: give me a little time to read through a few things check for yourself check i mean their
[Guest]: historical evidence is available everywhere so you just check for yourself whether what
[Guest]: i'm saying what i'm writing is correct or not correct then real thing i mean if you
[Guest]: just see around you don't even have to uh make an effort if you just try and look around
[Guest]: and with an open mind you'll see what kind of people are uh all around you what kind
[Guest]: of muslim people are around you you look at the muslims who are working in your offices
[Guest]: do they do they fit in the version you have of them in your mind you see the muslim in
[Guest]: your college is that the person you think a muslim is supposed to be then you'll realize
[Guest]: that actually it is not difficult to break through your perceptions big break through
[Guest]: your prejudice which you have inherited from your probably your parents or your leaders
[Guest]: or yours or which you learned in some school you went to and that is the only way we can
[Guest]: actually collectively move forward muslims cannot move forward on their own they have
[Amit Varma]: to move forward with everybody else no man is an island i'd urge my listeners to read
[Amit Varma]: your book because this is really only a small sampling of it everything that we've discussed
[Amit Varma]: today and to really discuss your book properly would take 30 hours and not three and i don't
[Amit Varma]: want to inflict that on you so i'll move away from the book for a moment and end with some
[Amit Varma]: larger questions your thoughts on some larger issues and one is something that i don't have
[Amit Varma]: an answer to which is how liberal are we as a society for example at one point i did an
[Amit Varma]: episode with jp narayan the politician and i mentioned to him that india is a deeply
[Amit Varma]: illiberal society and i hardly need to elaborate on that the way women are treated the way
[Amit Varma]: minorities are treated the caste system blah blah blah and he said that if you look at
[Amit Varma]: it another way we are a deeply liberal society in terms of our lived life the way that there
[Amit Varma]: is a lift tolerance there we assimilate so much from so many cultures and all of that
[Amit Varma]: and i get it that there is a stand of that also now when i look back on indian history
[Amit Varma]: in the last sort of hundred years what what kind of strikes me is that what is happening
[Amit Varma]: today while it has come to our politics this sort of othering of muslims and this very
[Amit Varma]: toxic polarizing politics while it's come to our politics today while it's gained dominance
[Amit Varma]: in our politics today rather it's always been in our culture something that i got a slightly
[Amit Varma]: deeper realization of when i did an episode with akshay mukul who's written a brilliant
[Amit Varma]: book on the gita press and one sees that you know when you look at the bhagavad you know
[Amit Varma]: their version of the bhagavad gita selling 70 million copies and the kind of things that
[Amit Varma]: they sell not just the bhagavad gita which anyway everyone should read it's a great book
[Amit Varma]: regardless or whatever but the other kind of stuff that they sell including uh you know
[Amit Varma]: much of like you know what i learned from reading his book was how old these campaigns
[Amit Varma]: like love jihad and the campaign against cow slaughter and all of those actually are it's
[Amit Varma]: not something new it's they've gained dominance in politics recently but they've been around
[Amit Varma]: in culture for a long time and my sort of sense and the sense that kind of gives me
[Amit Varma]: some hope is that we all contain multitudes so therefore somebody who might on the one
[Amit Varma]: hand be drawn by abstract notions of nationalism or india is for the hindus or whatever might
[Amit Varma]: also have other aspects to her personality which are much more tolerant and assimilative
[Amit Varma]: and therefore uh you know one hopeful hypothesis is that what currently uh the people in power
[Amit Varma]: have managed to appeal to and what has currently become the dominant narrative strand is this
[Amit Varma]: particular strand but there are other strands which are possible because there are you know
[Amit Varma]: we do contain multitudes we are illiberal but at the same time we are liberal what is
[Amit Varma]: your take on that you know is there uh you know like someone once said whatever you say
[Amit Varma]: of india the opposite is also true so is that something that you'd agree with is that something
[Amit Varma]: that you know i i know that we can look all around us and there is a lot to give us the
[Amit Varma]: spare are there also things that give you hope and feel that at a cultural level because
[Amit Varma]: it has to change at a cultural level first before anything else changes at a cultural
[Amit Varma]: level is there hope that say the better angels of our nature so to say can express themselves
[Guest]: what is your sense of this uh i i completely agree we are actually there's a huge dichotomy
[Guest]: between in our country we have always been very tolerant of outsiders at one level but
[Guest]: we have also been xenophobic i mean we have been very liberal in our approach to a lot
[Guest]: of issues acceptance of others being one of them tolerance of everybody whether it's you
[Guest]: know even gay i mean now there has been a bit of homophobia around i mean there has
[Guest]: been a strand of homophobia but there has been acceptance and it's part been part of
[Guest]: our culture we have been very very reverential about women in certain matters and i'm not
[Guest]: talking about worship but we have been accepting of women leadership also and not just in politics
[Guest]: but in other parts of our lives also whether it's businesses business houses or in within
[Guest]: the family and then we have cases of complete horrific violence against women so we kind
[Guest]: of inhabit both worlds but uh coming to your question specific question about what gives
[Guest]: you hope i think the recent example of this caa nrc protest which broke out or which started
[Guest]: in uh shaheen bagh and it kind of sprouted in all parts of india and it was essentially
[Guest]: driven by a muslim's insecurity about their place in india whether they'll be declared
[Guest]: as non-indians and shoved into some camp but the kind of support that it garnered from
[Guest]: all sorts of people even people who were no not known to be activists they came out on
[Guest]: the streets to uh support this assault on what they called constitution but assault
[Guest]: on constitution again is an abstract vague concept essentially on the ground what was
[Guest]: happening was assault on a community based on their religion and you see people who had
[Guest]: no familiarity with the urdu poetry were singing faiz emad faiz and there were people who had
[Guest]: memorized it and actually it's not an easy to learn and it's not easy to understand also
[Guest]: besides it has a very strong islamic imagery i mean though it's not a religious poem but
[Guest]: it has a strong islamic imagery which goes back to the time of the prophet so uh despite
[Guest]: that people were saying that so i think that all this shows that there is a sustained pushback
[Guest]: in whatever way you know if you're faced with police and police is completely compromised
[Guest]: and they're hitting out at you it's very difficult and it's not fair also to expect that people
[Guest]: will will continuously be standing against uh this sort of violence but this pushback
[Guest]: this uh even emotional agitation which uh happened among a lot of people and non-muslims
[Guest]: it's very it's i encouraging is a very condescending word it is something which tells you that
[Guest]: uh this rss outreach it's not been a completely successful project that despite uh they're
[Guest]: trying to kind of build a narrative in their own way uh it has not percolated down to the
[Guest]: last citizen of the country there are people who are still thinking and resisting because
[Guest]: they feel that this is not what uh india is or this is not what india stands for i think
[Guest]: this is this has been a huge moment i i am also not a activist by temperament i am a
[Guest]: very uh quite a sort of a person i like to be on my own i like being on my own quietly
[Guest]: sitting in one corner and just thinking about things and daydreaming or i'm not a very social
[Guest]: person but when all this was happening and i was reading up stuff and i was watching
[Guest]: videos it was something which was filling me up with this huge desire to go out there
[Guest]: and maybe i should also stand with them and do something maybe uh i'm wasting my life
[Guest]: just sitting in my study and doing nothing uh so that sort of momentum which it created
[Guest]: i think in it has been unparalleled in recent times and this is what is happening now with
[Guest]: the farmers protest also so probably things will not change in a hurry but as long as
[Guest]: this resistance is there as long as there are people who believe that they need to stand
[Guest]: up and be counted whatever the consequences we shouldn't despair no very wise words and
[Amit Varma]: and as an aside you mentioned daydreaming now and earlier and it struck me when you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned it earlier that i'm also a huge daydreamer to the point that you know when
[Amit Varma]: i first read james serber's famous short story the secret life of walter mitty i thought
[Amit Varma]: that what is a big deal about this aren't we all like this you know am i the only unusual
[Amit Varma]: person who's exactly like this and again i've done episodes on the caa and also radically
[Amit Varma]: networked societies i link those from the show notes which that was a great example
[Amit Varma]: of society and the state that also gave me a lot of hope so many young people not just
[Amit Varma]: singing fairs but uh you know uh waving the preamble of the constitution on the streets
[Amit Varma]: like who would have thunk of something like that a generation back though i wish they
[Amit Varma]: had waved the ambedkar version and not the indira gandhi uh version with the word socialism
[Amit Varma]: in it but regardless some preamble is better than no preamble my other question is about
[Amit Varma]: politics now at at one point um in your book and i'll go back to your book just to uh sort
[Amit Varma]: of get into the subject where uh you write about indira gandhi's role in this and you
[Amit Varma]: say quote the deterioration was due to a large degree to indira gandhi's changed style of
[Amit Varma]: politics the minorities had begun to move away from the congress i uh indira gandhi
[Amit Varma]: made a bid for the hindu vote to the bjp's discomfort uh stop quote and i i did an episode
[Amit Varma]: with vinay sitapati recently on uh you know the bjp before uh modi and shah so to say
[Amit Varma]: and one of the things that emerges there is that the congress turned to the hindu vote
[Amit Varma]: in a big way in the early 80s and the bjp had then uh you know when they were formed
[Amit Varma]: vajpayee was saying all these flowery things about gandhi and socialism and all that but
[Amit Varma]: they had to respond because the hindu vote was going away and therefore they responded
[Amit Varma]: by getting more and more radical and uh you know and it became a race to the bottom and
[Amit Varma]: of course the bjp won because uh you know the bottom was not a new place for them uh
[Amit Varma]: so uh and and when i look at current times one of the things that disheartens me is that
[Amit Varma]: uh that soft hindutva of the congress remains in a lot of what they do they did make kamal
[Amit Varma]: jainath cm of uh madhya pradesh despite all their posturing on uh twitter they'll do that
[Amit Varma]: soft hindutva thing they'll chase that vote you know when the temple judgment came they
[Amit Varma]: actually said that uh you know uh it was rajiv gandhi who first opened the gates and all
[Amit Varma]: of that you see the amadmi party uh chasing that also with the you know the chanting of
[Amit Varma]: the hanuman chalisa after the last election and all of that and i think one realization
[Amit Varma]: or at least one perception because it may not be true so i won't call it realization
[Amit Varma]: but one perception which all these parties seem to have come to is that you cannot mess
[Amit Varma]: with the hindu vote so uh does that put a limit on the politics that can happen on behalf
[Amit Varma]: of the marginalized people uh in this country the fact that you know that there is a realization
[Amit Varma]: among the parties or there is an perception among the parties because i don't believe
[Amit Varma]: it's entirely true but there is a perception among the parties that you cannot piss off
[Amit Varma]: the hindu vote which is why even when caa was happening right there in delhi you did
[Amit Varma]: not see kejriwal besides making a few token noises really going out there and doing something
[Amit Varma]: about it so now obviously it is true as i keep saying on the show that politics is downstream
[Amit Varma]: of culture the culture has to change first then the politics will respond but uh you
[Amit Varma]: know the culture is complicated it's got multitudes all of that but in a political sense is there
[Amit Varma]: something that gives you hope someone who will actually fight against this because you
[Amit Varma]: know despite the random twitter posturing the rahul gandhi may do on the ground the
[Amit Varma]: congress doesn't give a shit they're playing the soft end of the game so what is your perception
[Amit Varma]: of our politics the way it is and what it means for muslims see i think uh under the
[Guest]: circumstances uh the soft hindutva would be acceptable to a large number of people because
[Guest]: at least uh this doesn't result in everyday violence i mean congress has been done doing
[Guest]: soft hindutva for decades but it didn't result in uh lynching of people and at least there
[Guest]: was some token lip service uh after every riot and the government or the law enforcement
[Guest]: agencies didn't really go after the victims in the way they do now i mean they actually
[Guest]: frame the victims if a person is getting lynched his the charge sheet is filed against his
[Guest]: family also so at least this sort of everyday terrorism of civilians was not uh there so
[Guest]: probably we'll return to this happy coexistence of uh increasing hinduization of indian society
[Guest]: which i think it very difficult to resist for the simple reason the majority is hindu
[Guest]: and uh there is increased religiosity of our public spaces it's not just hindu religiosity
[Guest]: but even muslims are becoming overtly i mean in their wherever their numerical strengths
[Guest]: they are becoming overtly demonstrative about their identity or any other religion so that
[Guest]: is something which is uh happening in our society probably some kind of churning is
[Guest]: required and at some level we'll some point in time we'll realize that it is all stupidity
[Guest]: and we'll go back to being normal human beings but if this fear of if this fear of the street
[Guest]: goes away then probably more muslims can come out and claim part of this street right now
[Guest]: one of the reasons why they are comfortable in moving to a ghetto though they don't get
[Guest]: accommodation in a lot of places but even when the accommodation option is available
[Guest]: a lot of them prefer to go to a ghetto is because they think it's safe for them and
[Guest]: their children so once your streets are safer your public transportation is safer you'll
[Guest]: see more people accessing it more people trying making an effort here more people asserting
[Guest]: their rights here so that can probably over a period of time have a cascading effect on
[Guest]: our society and our you know the culture as we know it and going back to what kefi has
[Guest]: we had said that if every hindu has one or two muslim friends then if there are more
[Guest]: muslims in public spaces and probably more hindus can find muslim friends and they'll
[Guest]: learn to distinguish between what they perceived and what they find your very wise words i've
[Amit Varma]: taken up a lot of your time so i'll end with a final question which has nothing to do either
[Amit Varma]: with the book or the subject at hand but instead about you i'm always sort of awed when an
[Amit Varma]: author writes a book like this because i think about just that process how it must have changed
[Amit Varma]: that person because i think writing a serious book is always also a process of self-discovery
[Amit Varma]: about learning things about yourself and all of that how did this book change you like
[Amit Varma]: what are the big things you know now that you did not know before the book perhaps or
[Amit Varma]: you know i mean what gave you the impetus to do a book like this and having done a book
[Amit Varma]: like this you know what was the process like was it difficult was it hard at one point
[Amit Varma]: you wrote about you know how your dad wasn't so comfortable about the personal bits of
[Amit Varma]: you know your childhood and all of that but i think yesterday on twitter you wrote that
[Amit Varma]: he said to you that he's very proud of the way that you've written about the whole subject
[Amit Varma]: and indeed he should be because what a wonderful book so tell me a little bit about this process
[Guest]: and what it's meant to you actually i think i was veering towards writing this book since
[Guest]: i started this magazine called force in 2003 though it was a magazine on national security
[Guest]: and defense and our focus was on the indian military and external defense at that time
[Guest]: but that was also the time when this global war on terrorism was underway and we used
[Guest]: to meet i mean when i used to go and meet people especially from the armed forces i
[Guest]: used to hear constantly that about terrorism i used to travel a lot to kashmir my early
[Guest]: reporting uh was always from kashmir and and i as i became more and more familiar with
[Guest]: the insurgency and the antecedents of insurgency the problems that the people are facing there
[Guest]: again the vilification which we see now in the mainstream the mainland india i started
[Guest]: with kashmir i mean that is the people have been living with that for years so i i used
[Guest]: to write when i used to come back and write my article in the magazine i used to bring
[Guest]: in these elements about how rumors are spread how perceptions are deliberately built to
[Guest]: actually dehumanize some people i mean uh my early earliest experience in kashmir was
[Guest]: so uh traumatizing for me i mean though i was not at the receiving end but i was being
[Guest]: driven to uh to a separatist leader's house by a local boy who wanted to become a journalist
[Guest]: i had gone to the press colony to meet some people and one of the journalists said that
[Guest]: my younger brother also wants to be a journalist and he wants to go to delhi and study journalism
[Guest]: very young nice enthusiastic boy and he offered to drive me uh to this leader's house and
[Guest]: while we were going there the car was stopped by a crpf guy who used his bait into we very
[Guest]: violently uh bound the the engine the drum and he stopped the car and he spoke to this
[Guest]: boy very harshly and this boy immediately minutes before was you know very enthusiastically
[Guest]: telling me his plans and how he was going to finish school now and if i could help him
[Guest]: and uh he was stopped violently and this guy he was scouring in fear i mean he was shaken
[Guest]: up so badly he got out of the car and this constable was so insulting i also got out
[Guest]: and i said why are you talking to him like this and he said madam up to pray here
[Guest]: so i felt this everyday humiliation and this boy from that point till the rest of my journey
[Guest]: he kept quiet he didn't say anything because obviously he felt so humiliated in front of
[Guest]: somebody he was bragging about he was talking about how great he is and how well he's doing
[Guest]: in school and so that was my first experience and then subsequently i used to see we are
[Guest]: traveling someplace and i'm one fancy journalist from delhi so nobody would trouble me but
[Guest]: uh the driver of the car would be harassed the taxi would be harassed at every checkpoint
[Guest]: and every hundred meters there would be a checkpoint so that i i became more um engaged
[Guest]: with their everyday struggle instead of the big picture of pakistan instigating violence
[Guest]: or terrorism into india and while i was engaging with them more and more i came across a islamic
[Guest]: sect la hadith my first encounter with the islamic sect was in kashmir because in delhi
[Guest]: i have not been so exposed to the muslims or various strands of islam because i was
[Guest]: not exposed to them when i was growing up in my work my career did not expose me to
[Guest]: this kind of uh religious conservatism but it was in kashmir so that is how i got drawn
[Guest]: into uh writing you know kind of a clarification about the religion and trying to address both
[Guest]: the muslims as well as the non-muslims that uh you know this is nonsense what i'm talking
[Guest]: about so jihad was one of the early subjects that i started writing about that you know
[Guest]: it's nonsense so as in uh gradually i became more and more involved in uh writing on terrorism
[Guest]: i realized that even my understanding was so limited so i had to do a lot of reading
[Guest]: to actually make sense of my arguments so with this background when i started to write
[Guest]: the book or when i started to conceptualize i my first audience i thought was going to
[Guest]: be the muslims and i was going to tell them that you're stupid people why are you uh doing
[Guest]: these things to yourself i mean this is not what the religion tells you but in the course
[Guest]: of researching for it i uh came across uh these examples which i have just narrated
[Guest]: from kashmir and i realized that this sort of marginalization everyday marginalization
[Guest]: in your your cities in your workplaces uh is actually a reality which i have been blind
[Guest]: to because maybe my privileged background and the fact that in media in any case there
[Guest]: is a preponderance of muslims so that kind of insulates you from the larger society because
[Guest]: you only see uh what you see around you i mean you don't really see beyond what is evident
[Guest]: to you it's only when you sit down and sometimes reflect and then you realize that probably
[Guest]: there is another side to the story or there is a truth behind uh what is visible to you
[Guest]: at that point so that is how the process started and my biggest learning and actually it has
[Guest]: been a massive learning is about my own religion because i did not have this great background
[Guest]: in religious history or practices because it was never inculcated in me when i was growing
[Guest]: up uh this has been a revelation i had never regarded islam as a reasonable and you know
[Guest]: a balanced sort of faith i was not aware that even today it's like this peaceful conversion
[Guest]: to islam as a worldwide phenomena i mean when i was looking at these statistics i realized
[Guest]: there must be something about it which people still find gives them hope so they want to
[Guest]: embrace it so this has been a learning for me and i feel if i can learn this if i can
[Guest]: find this out without making so much of an effort i mean it just takes a little bit of
[Guest]: reading and a little bit of observation why can't others do that you know i think you're
[Amit Varma]: understating it when you say a little bit of reading and a little bit of observation
[Amit Varma]: because you've clearly done a lot of both and and you know what i'm also impressed by
[Amit Varma]: is that all we spoke about here is really your book in this subject you are actually
[Amit Varma]: a deep expert in another subject uh you know you found it force you've written this wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book dragon on our doorstep with praveen soni completely again different subject that's
[Amit Varma]: about managing china and india's defense and all of that and so you don't like your book
[Amit Varma]: you contain multitudes as well and perhaps you know one day you can show up again on
[Amit Varma]: this show and we can discuss some other things but meanwhile you know i have to thank you
[Amit Varma]: first for writing your wonderful book which i think everyone who is listening to this
[Amit Varma]: should read and secondly for being so incredibly patient with me and you know sharing your
[Guest]: time and your thoughts with me thank you gazala thank you so much it was absolute delight
[Amit Varma]: being here thank you
[Amit Varma]: if you enjoyed listening to this episode hop on over to your nearest bookstore online or
[Amit Varma]: offline and buy gazala wahab's wonderful book born a muslim some truths about islam in india
[Amit Varma]: you can follow gazala on twitter at gazala wahab you can follow me at amit varma a m i
[Amit Varma]: t v a r m a you can browse past episodes of the scene in the unseen at seen unseen.in
[Amit Varma]: thank you for listening
[Amit Varma]: did you enjoy this episode of the scene in the unseen if so would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of this show you can go over to seen unseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking thank you